 Distinguish in meaning between the nouns mens and mensa. ANSWER: mens, mind mensa, table BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the adverbs ibi and ubi. ANSWER: ibi, there/in that place
 Give the principal parts of the verb that functions as the passive of facio. ANSWER: fio, fieri, factusl -um [sum] BONUS: In the motto Fiat Lux, what tense and mood are Fiat? ANSWER: present subjunctive
 Who became consul of Rome in the same year Julius Caesar became pontifex maximus? ANSWER: Cicero BONUS: To what Greek orator is Cicero often compared? ANSWER: Demosthenes
 What mythological figure possessed the ability to understand the language of animals? ANSWER: Melampus BONUS: How did Melampus acquire this unusual skill? ANSWER: baby snakes cleaned his ears with their tongues after he gave proper
 Who, though a slave, was Cicero's literary consultant and private secretary? ANSWER: Tiro BONUS: When Cicero freed Tiro, what name did Tiro take? ANSWER: Marcus Tullius Tiro
 Listen to the following sentence: Dic mihi quis haec carmina scripserit. What is the construction quis .. scripserit called? ANSWER: indirect question BONUS: What is the tense and mood of scripserit? ANSWER: perfect subjunctive
 The Underworld is a strange and mysterious place in classical mythology. The Underworld has its own rulers, as well as its own geography. In Tartarus, what was unique about the Plegathon River? ANSWER: It was always on fire. BONUS: What special property is attributed to the Lethe River? ANSWER: People who drink it forget everything they know.
 Some people just never seem to be quiet. Ovid referred to this urge, which he called studium immane loquendi. Translate this quote. ANSWER: an insatiable/huge desire for talking BONUS: Another quote from Ovid reveals the author's reason for writing his poetry. Translate scribere iussit Amor. ANSWER: Love ordered [me] to write
 Quis scripsit libros De Officiis, De Amicitia, et De Senectute? ANSWER: Cicero BONUS: Quis scripsit Commentarios De Bello Gallico? ANSWER: Caesar
 The motto of Duke University, Eruditio et Religio, highlights two aspects of life that the University holds very important. Translate the motto into English. ANSWER: Learning and Religion BONUS: Another easily remembered motto is the motto of North Carolina, Esse quam videri. Translate this motto. ANSWER: To be rather than to seem
 Distinguish in meaning between the nouns aetas and aestas. ANSWER: aetas, age/lifetime aestas, summer BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns aestas and aestus. ANSWER: aestas, summer
 Centaurus was a monster who mated with mares grazing on Mt. Pelion. Who were the parents of Centaurus? ANSWER: ixion and a cloud (in the shape of Hera) BONUS: What race of beings resulted in the mating of Centaurus and the mares of Mt. Pelion? ANSWER: the Centaurs
 While wandering around in ancient Rome, I happened upon an area marked with a spear in the ground. What surprised me was that a man standing on a platform was wearing a funny little hat. What was happening to the man? ANSWER: he was being sold as a slave BONUS: What did the hat indicate? ANSWER: he was not under warranty
 The pronouns nostri and nostrum can both be translated "of us." What is the difference in their use? ANSWER: nostri is objective genitive, nostrum is partitive genitive BONUS: What two forms would be used to say "of you (plural)"? ANSWER: vestri and vestrum
 Where did Julius Caesar decisively defeat Pompey in 48 B.C.? ANSWER: Pharsalus BONUS: In what city did Pompey die? ANSWER: Alexandria
 What recent movie might the Romans have called Uxor Praedictoris? ANSWER: "The Preacher's Wife" "The Preacher's Wife" "My Fellow Americans" "Jingle All the Way" TOSSUP: What is the word for a scroll which has been erased and rewritten? BONUS: After writing a letter, a Roman would seal it with wax into which he pressed his signet ring. Where on his hand would he wear this ring? ANSWER: knuckle of his right ring finger
 Give the third person singular, present subjunctive, of possum. ANSWER: possit BONUS: Change possit to the imperfect. ANSWER: posset
 In what city was Marcus Tullius Cicero born? ANSWER: Arpinum BONUS: What teacher of rhetoric instructed both Cicero and Caesar? ANSWER: jApollonius] Molo
 Say in Latin "in a short time." ANSWER: brevi tempore BONUS: What case and construction is this phrase? ANSWER: ablative of time
 Distinguish in meaning between the nouns Os, oris and os. ossis. ANSWER: Os, oris, mouth/face os, ossis, bone BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the prepositions inter and intra. ANSWER: inter, between/among
 Identify the used of the subjunctive in this sentence. Tanta tempestas orta est ut navis frangeretur. ANSWER: [Adverbial] Result Clause BONUS: Veni ut hostes vincerem. ANSWER: [Adverbial] Purpose Clause
 Who defeated the Romans at Asculum in 279 B.C.? ANSWER: Pyrrhus BONUS: Whom did Rome defeat at the Metaurus River in 207 B.C.? ANSWER: Hasdrubal
 Several of the Greeks called on to fight in the Trojan War attempted to escape from their wartime responsibilities. How did Odysseus try to avoid going to Troy? ANSWER: he pretended he was insane by sowing the earth with salt BONUS: Who exposed Odysseus's ruse? ANSWER: Palamedes
 I hate these laws in Rome! I want to ride my chariot through the streets of the city, but the law won't let me. If I want to legally ride my chariot through the streets of Rome, what position must I have? ANSWER: Vestal Virgin BONUS: Name three criteria for becoming a Vestal Virgin. ANSWER: two living parents, a girl, physically flawless, between ages of 6 and 9 (any
 What speech of 70 B.C. established Cicero as chief advocate of Rome? ANSWER: In Verrem BONUS: Another speech of Cicero, the Pro Caelio, was a defense of Marcus Caelius Rufus on the charge of attempted poisoning. What woman was behind this charge? ANSWER: Clodia
 Name all three of Julius Caesar's wives in order. ANSWER: Cornelia, Pompeia, Calpurnia BONUS: Whom did Mark Antony and Octavian defeat at Philippi? ANSWER: Cassius and Brutus
 What type of literature did both Livy and Tacitus write? ANSWER: history/annals BONUS: What famous writer besides Cicero wrote an account of Catiline's conspiracy? ANSWER: Sallust
 After whose death at Troy did the clouds rain blood? ANSWER: Sarpedon BONUS: Who killed Sarpedon at Troy? ANSWER: Patroclus
 Who were the first two consuls of Rome? ANSWER: Brutus and Collatinus BONUS: Which one put his own sons to death for treason? ANSWER: Brutus
 Distinguish in meaning between the conjunctions ac and at. ANSWER: ac, and at, but BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns ripa and rima. ANSWER: ripa, [river] bank
 Who were the parents of the fifty Nereids, the most notable of whom were Thetis, Galatea, and Amphitrite? ANSWER: Nereus and Doris BONUS: With whom did Thetis unite in order to produce Achilles? ANSWER: Peleus
 A lot of important information can be found in names. If a Roman had the suffix -na on his nomen, where would he have originated? ANSWER: Etruria/he was Etruscan BONUS: What does the suffix -ianus indicate? ANSWER: that one has been adopted
 What does your doctor want you to do when he prescribes medicine with the directions "q. i. d."? ANSWER: take it four times a day (quater in diem) BONUS: What would you expect if your doctor prescribed your medicine to be "pulv."? ANSWER: a powder
 What Roman fleet commander was killed by the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius? ANSWER: Pliny the Elder BONUS: His nephew became well-known as a writer of letters. Who was he? ANSWER: Pliny the Younger
 The threshhold of a Roman house was an important part of Roman beliefs. What is the Latin word for "threshhold"? ANSWER: lumen BONUS: What did superstitious Romans avoid doing when they stepped over a threshhold? ANSWER: doing so with their left foot
 Listen to the following sentence: Hoc nostris militibus auxilio fuit. What is the case of both militibus and auxilio? ANSWER: dative BONUS: What is the use of the dative militibus called? ANSWER: dative of reference/advantage
 Everyone knows that the Roman emperor Constantine is credited with legalizing Christianity. However, he also had a famous motto meaning "In this sign you will conquer." What is this motto in Latin? ANSWER: In hoc signo vinces BONUS: What motto of the University of Pennsylvania means "We shall find a way or make one"? ANSWER: Inveniemus viam aut faciemus
 Give the third person plural, imperfect passive indicative, of the verb ago, agere. ANSWER: agebantur BONUS: Change agebantur to the present tense. ANSWER: aguntur
 Quis sum? Sermones et epistulam De Arte Poetica scripsi, et Carmen saeculare composui. ANSWER: Horace! Horatius BONUS: Quis sum? Libros epigrammaton scripsi. ANSWER: Martial/Martialis
 Distinguish in meaning between the adjective fortis and the adverb forte. ANSWER: fortis, strong/brave forte, by chance BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the verbs veho and veto. ANSWER: veho, carry/bear
 What use of the genitive is illustrated in this sentence? Est vir magnae virtutis. ANSWER: genitive of description BONUS: Give the same sentence with an ablative of description. ANSWER: Est vir magni virtute.
 What two leaders of the Populares and the Optimates developed an opposition that led to a bloody civil war? ANSWER: Marius and Sulla BONUS: Which wife of Julius Caesar was the granddaughter of Sulla? ANSWER: Pompeia
 The Cyclops Polyphemus was usually an overgrown, uncombed, and uncouth brute of a creature. However, one nymph made him temporarily change his ways. Name this nymph. ANSWER: Galatea BONUS: Despite the advances of Polyphemus, Galatea was in love with another man. Name Galatea's beloved. ANSWER: Acis
 Where would you find the following? alveus, natatio, laconicum, unctorium, apodyterium ANSWER: at the baths BONUS: What was the instrument used to scrape oil and sweat from a dirty Roman? ANSWER: strigil
 An early Roman author, who wrote tragedies and comedies and a translation of the Odyssey, was actually a Greek prisoner of war. Who was he? ANSWER: M. Livius Andronicus BONUS: Another early Roman comic playwright wrote Miles Gloriosus, Menaechmi, and other comedies. Who was he? ANSWER: Plautus
 What unwise Satyr picked up the flute after Athena discarded it, and later challenged Apollo to a music contest? ANSWER: Marsyas BONUS: What was Apollo's punishment for Marsyas after Apollo had won the music contest? ANSWER: Marsyas was flayed alive
 Which "Good Emperor" built the wall in Britain known as the Antonine Wall? ANSWER: Antoninus Pius BONUS: Who built the other Roman wall in Britain? ANSWER: Hadrian
 What was the full name of the poet who wrote Copa, Dirae, Culex, the Eclogues, the Georgics, and the Aeneid? ANSWER: Publius Vergilius Maro BONUS: By what other name are the Eclogues known? ANSWER: Bucolics
 Give the Latin for the motto of Oklahoma, "Work conquers all." ANSWER: Labor omnia vincit BONUS: Give the Latin for the motto of North Carolina, "To be rather than to seem." ANSWER: Esse quam videri
 The names for some body parts are sometimes confused with other nouns. Distinguish in meaning between genu and genus. ANSWER: genu, knee genus, birth/race/kind/family BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between crus and crux. ANSWER: crus, leg
 Everyone knows that the god Pan was not especially popular with the ladies. What nymph was transformed into a pine tree while fleeing from Pan's unwanted advances? ANSWER: Pinus BONUS: What nymph was transformed into a reed while fleeing from Pan's amorous pursuit? ANSWER: Syrinx
 Close your eyes and imagine that you are at the colosseum watching a gladiator fight. My favorite gladiator is the guy with a big fish on his helmet. What is the name for such a gladiator? ANSWER: murmillo BONUS: What is the name for a gladiator who fought with a net and trident? ANSWER: retiarius
 The state motto of Arkansas is Regnat populus. What does this motto mean in English? ANSWER: The people rule BONUS: The University of Delaware's motto is Scientia sol mentis est. What is the English meaning for this phrase? ANSWER: Knowledge is the sun of the mind
 Name the town in Cisalpine Gaul where Decimus Brutus was besieged by Antony and where Hirtius and Pansa were killed in 43 B.C. ANSWER: Mutina BONUS: Whom had Brutus defeated in a naval battle in 56 B.C. under Julius Caesar? ANSWER: the Veneti
 In what land does the story of Pyramus and Thisbe take place? ANSWER: Babylon BONUS: What was the name of the king near whose tomb Pyramus and Thisbe were supposed to meet? ANSWER: Ninus
 What current TV show would the Romans have called Tertium Saxum a Sole? ANSWER: "Third Rock from the Sun" "Friends" "Wings" TOSSUP: In writing his Aeneid, which works of Homer did Vergil follow? BONUS: In writing his Odes, which two Greek lyric poets did Horace follow? ANSWER: Sappho and Alcaeus
 Translate the sentence Carmen mihi scribendum est. ANSWER: A poem must be written by me./I must write a poem. BONUS: What is the name of the construction scribendum est? ANSWER: [future] passive periphrastic
 Give the second person singular, perfect active indicative, of the verb duco, ducere. ANSWER: duxisti BONUS: Change duxisti to passive. ANSWER: ductus/-a/-um es
 Distinguish in meaning between the infinitives servare and servire. ANSWER: servare, [to] guard/keep/save servire, [to] serve BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the two infinitives esse. ANSWER: [to] be, [to] eat
 What do we call verbs such as licet, pluit, and oportet? ANSWER: impersonal verbs BONUS: Change licet to the imperfect. ANSWER: licebat
 What Roman general was nicknamed "the sword of Rome"? ANSWER: Marcellus BONUS: What Gallic chieftain did Marcellus kill in hand-to-hand combat, thus winning the spolia opima? ANSWER: Viridomarus
 What Giant did Heracles kill by holding the Giant up in the air, away from the earth? ANSWER: Antaeus BONUS: Who were the parents of Antaeus? ANSWER: Poseidon and Ge/Gaia
 After a hard day as a poor man, I enjoy the only drink I can afford. This drink is a mixture of vinegar and water. What is it called? ANSWER: posca BONUS: What is the Latin word for "vinegar"? ANSWER: acetum
 What is the nominative plural of carmen? ANSWER: carmina BONUS: Change carmina to the accusative. ANSWER: carmina
 I lived from 43 B.C. to A.D. 1 I wrote the Heroides, the Fasti, and the Metamorphoses. What is my full name? ANSWER: Publius Ovidius Naso BONUS: In what meter were the Metamorphoses written? ANSWER: dactylic hexameter
 Who was Orpheus's mother, a well-known Muse? ANSWER: Calliope BONUS: Which of the Muses represents History? ANSWER: Clio
 What figure of speech consists of repetition of a word for emphasis? ANSWER: anaphora BONUS: What figure of speech consists of two nouns joined by a conjunction in place of one modified noun? ANSWER: hendiadys
 Cicero's cursus honorum began with his job as quaestor. Where and in what year was this? ANSWER: Sicily, 75 B.C. BONUS: What did Cicero's achievement of being a novus homo mean? ANSWER: no ancestor had held a high office
 Distinguish in meaning between the foods uva and plural ova. ANSWER: uva, grape ova, eggs BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the body parts genu and gena. ANSWER: genu, knee
 Tales of lovers are common throughout mythology. What old couple was spared from the flood and turned into trees after they treated Zeus and Hermes kindly? ANSWER: Baucis and Philemon BONUS: What two Babylonian young people killed themselves after an unfortunate misunderstanding? ANSWER: Pyramus and Thisbe
 Curse this hair! Whom might I see to have my feminine locks done nicely? ANSWER: an ornatrix BONUS: What instrument was used to curl hair? ANSWER: calamistrum
 Who wrote an eye-witness account of the eruption of Vesuvius in A.D. 79? ANSWER: Pliny the Younger BONUS: To which Roman historian did Pliny write this account? ANSWER: Tacitus
 What two tenses of the subjunctive may follow a past tense main verb? ANSWER: imperfect and pluperfect BONUS: What two tenses of the subjunctive may follow a present tense main verb? ANSWER: present and perfect
 Finish the following well-known proverb: Quot homines, tot ANSWER: sententiae BONUS: Finish this one: Si vis pacem, para ANSWER: bellum
 What poet says, "I hate and I love"? ANSWER: Catullus BONUS: What eleven-syllable meter is frequently used by Catullus? ANSWER: hendecasyllabics/Phalaecean
 What nymph fell in love with Hermaphroditus? ANSWER: Salmacis BONUS: After Hermaphroditus rejected Salmacis' advances, she jumped on him while he was swimming in a spring. He could not rid himself of her, so he prayed to the gods. What was the result of this prayer? ANSWER: Hermaphroditus and Salmacis combined bodies into a creature
 What is the correct form of the adjective fortis, forte to agree with the noun animos? ANSWER: fortes BONUS: Change animos fortes to the ablative plural. ANSWER: animis fortibus
 In British universities, there is an official excuse for students called an "aegrotat." For what reason would a student need an aegrotat? ANSWER: illness BONUS: Another Latin verb used as a noun in English is "recipe." What mood is recipe? ANSWER: imperative (singular) BONUS: A warning is often called a "caveat." What type of subjunctive is caveat? ANSWER: jussive/volitive/hortatory
