 TOSSUP:  Give the Latin word and its meaning from which we
derive the wora "officious"? ANS:Officium-duty
BONUS: What work of Cicero was written for his son in 44
B.C.? 
ANS:De officiis
 TOSSUP:  What farcical play aid Plautus write about a slave
ana a boastful captain? ANS:Miles Gioriosus
BONUS: Where was Plautus born? ANS:Sarsina in Umbria
 TOSSUP:  On what subject aia Cicero give his first Political
speech? ANS:The Manilian Law
BONUS: in what year was this law passea and what aid it proviae
for? ANS:66 B.0 and it cave Pompey the richt to fight against Mithrioates
 TOSSUP:  Caesar, Varro, Lucretius, Sallust. Which of these
dian't write on history? ANS: Lucretius
BONUS: Give the Latin for the phrase that Lucretius wrote
meaning "Nothing comes from nothing". ANS:Ex nihilo nihil fit.
 TOSSUP:  "0 tempora, 0 mores" is a phrase written by Cicero
illustrating what arammatical construction?
ANS:Accusative of Exclamation

BONUS: In what work is this phrase found? ANS:The First
Catillinarian
 TOSSUP:  In 36 B.C., Octavian defeats Sextus Pompeius at
what battle. the largest and most decisive naval victory in
ancient history? ANS:The Battle of Naulochus
BONUS:-.-• Where did Agrippa train Augustus' naval forces? ANS:Portus Iulius
 TOSSUP:  Complete the following analogy
The 1st Triumvirate:Luca  The 2nd Triumvirate:

ANS:Tarentum

BONUS: What year did this re-affirmation take place? ANS:37 B.C.
 TOSSUP: - Octavian was very fortunate to have such gooa
friends. Name Octavian's three boon companions.
ANS:Salvidienus Rufus. Maecenas. and Acrippa
BONUS: In what years did Macenas and Agrippa die?
ANS:Maecenas-8 B.C. Agripoa- 12 B.C.
 TOSSUP:  In the novel Jane Eyre.while Jane is walking
arouna confused and hungry, she finally sees a light through the

wile scenery. She says to herself, That is an ignis fatuus."
What aces Jane mean by an icnis fatuus? ANS:Literally a foolish flame. or a foolish icea.
BONUS: Earlier on in her life Jane is fcrcea to co to an
orphanace called Lowood. She meets a airi named Helen Burns who
becomes very close to Jane but Helen dies curing an epicemic. On
her tombstone lies the inscription "Resurgam. What does this
mean? ANS:I will rise again
 TOSSUP:  For whom aid Galanthis trick. Eileithyia into
abandoning her charms that were preventing her birth of Iphicies
and Heracies? ANS:Alcmene
BONUS: How was Eileithyia preventing the chiiaoirth?
ANS:She was sitting by her altar by the =or of the oearocm with her
legs and fincers tichtly crossed.
 TOSSUP:  In Vergil's epitaph, to what ao "pascua. rura.
duces° refer. ANS:pascua-Ecolocues. rura- Georcics. duces-Aeneid
BONUS: What is the meter of Vergil's epitaph? ANS:eieciac couclec
 TOSSUP:  "The red rooster ran right into the miadie of the
raucous. rowdy. rubbish." What rhetorical cevice is this?

ANS:Alliteration

BONUS: "I'm not cenyinc that the girls at Flint Hill are the
prettiest...." This is an example of what rhetorical aevice?

ANS:Litotes

 TOSSUP:  Distinguish between "for" and "fors. ANS:For-to speak Fors-chance
BONUS: What adjective to we derive from the Latin word "fors"?

ANS:fortuitous

 TOSSUP:  In 59 B.C.. Caesar is consul with Bibulus. It was
called by some the consulship of "Julius and Caesar". Say in
Latin,-: In the consulship of Julius and Caesar". ANS:Consulibus Julio et Caesare. Consulibus Julio Bibulocue
BONUS: "Triumvirum rei publicae constituendae fui per continuos
annos decem." In this sentence from the Res Gestae Divi
Augusti, identify the grammatical use of "rei publicae
constituendae." ANS:Dative of Purpose
 TOSSUP:  In 17 B.C., Horace wrote what hymn for Augustus'
Secular Games? ANS:Carmen Saeculare
BONUS: Give the plural of Carmen Saeculare. ANS:Carmina Saecularia
 TOSSUP: MS Who ridiculed and questioned Phaethon's divine
lineage, which eventually caused him to seek his father Helius?

ANS:Epaphus

BONUS: What other friend mourned the aeath of Phaethon by
singing a sad sons and was transformed into a swan? ANS:Cycnus

 TOSSUP:  Between the years 41-40 B.C.. Octavian defeated
Lucius Antonius and Fulvia in what war? ANS:The Perusine War
BONUS: What two people did Octavian ask for help in this war?
ANS:Salvidienus Rufus and AariPoa
 TOSSUP:  Translate the following: Omnes sciunt me pate
aspera. ANS:Everyone knows that I am encurinc difficulties.
BONUS: Translate this: Nescio cuffs scribat has quaesitiones.
ANS:I do not know who is writing these cuestions. (The answer of course is David Lee)
 TOSSUP:  What year am I? The Temple of Mars Ultor is
dedicated. Julia is exiled. and Aucustus received the Pacer
Patriae. ANS:2 B.C.
BONUS: What year am I? The conspiracy of Caepio and Murena
occurs. Agrippa is sent to the East. and Marceilus dies. ANS:23 B.C.

TOSSUP:  I Know that you are very sac that the first round.
written oy David Lee. is over. What emperor wouid have been sac
on account of his pumpkinification in Seneca's Apocoiocvntosis?
ANS:Claudius
BONUS: Who were the two children of Claudius by Valeria
Messalina? ANS:Octavia and Brittanicus


TOSSUP: Who am I? I am two years Augustus' senior. My school
-Ina was done in Rome under Orbilius. I was at Philippi
with Brutus as his tribunus militum and two of my
friends included Maecenas and Vergil. Some of my works
are the Ars Pcetica. Eloistulae. Epodes. and Carmina.
ANS:Quintus Horatius Flaccus
BONUS: Give the years of Horace's birth and death.
ANS:65 BC and 8 BC
TOSSUP: What was the scene woven by Arachne when she was
challenged by Athena because she boasted that she was
a better weaver? ANS:she showed the seductions of women by the gods
BONUS: What nymph was seduced by Neptune in the
form of a dolphin? ANS:Meiantho
TOSSUP: What was the name first known to the Greeks for
Italy meaning vineland? ANS:Oenotria
BONUS: What festival was associated with making
wine? ANS:vinalia rustica
TOSSUP: What profession would have been known in Rome as
araentarii? ANS:bankers
BONUS: What is the Latin name for auilds in Rome?
ANS:colleala
TOSSUP: What muse would Vergil have invoked to help him
write the Aeneid? ANS:Calliope
BONUS: What is a virga? ANS:it is rod. or a prophetic wand (associated with the "Virgil" spelling)
TOSSUP: What rhetorical device is shown in this Horatian
sentence: manet sub love frigido? ANS:metonymy
BONUS: What rhetorical device is shown in this
sentence: quem fors dierum cumque dabit? ANS:tmesis
TOSSUP: What subjunctive is shown in this sentence: Hoc quid
putemus esse? ANS:deliberative

BONUS: How would you translate: Hcc quid putemus
esse? ANS: what are we to think/ what are we to think this
TOSSUP: What husband of Augustus' sister Octavia was the
ancestor of Claudius. Nero and Caligula? ANS:M. Antonius
BONUS: Who was the alleged son of Caesar and
Cleopatra? ANS:Caesarion
TOSSUP: My name is known by ornithologists as a family of
birds. Picidae. because I was turned into such a bird
by Circe. What kind of bird am I? ANS:woodpecker
BONUS: Many people in mythology have been turned
into birds and their names are now part of
identifying species of birds. What bird was the
nephew of Daedalus turned into? ANS:partidge
TOSSUP: Translate into Latin the following famous line from
the Aeneid:Perhaps some day it will be a joy to
recall even these things? ANS:Forsan et haec olim meminisse
iuvabit
BONUS: Laocoon told the Trojans not to trust the
horse in three words, give these three words? ANS:Equo ne credite


Wto am 1? I was a king of Rome culing from 616 BC- bt9 BC. My tather was Demaratus or Corinth ana I am
from Etruria. I was involved in the foundation of the
temple of the Capitoline Triad. My sons. Aruns and
Lucius. married daighters of Servius Tullius and my
wife. Tanaquil, helped Servius to gain the throne.
ANS:Tarquinius Priscus
fBONUS: Hora Cuirini, the goddess of beauty, was the
deification of whom? ANS: Hersilia
TOSSUP: I am a daughter of Uranus and Gaea. I was married
to Juppiter and mother of Moirae, Horae, Astraea. and
Dike. I invented hexameter and I am pictured with
scales and the cornucopia. I told Deucalion how to
repopulate the Earth. Who am I? ANS: Themis

BONUS: In what river did Pheathon fall after the
Sun's chariot was destroyed by Jupoiter? ANS:Ericanus (do not accept Po)
TOSSUP: What poetic device is shown in the following

sentence: in loco atque vino tollis lintea nealeaenti-
arum? ANS:hendiadys

BONUS: What word form was a Catullan signature as
shown by such words as libellus, ocellus, labellus
etc.? ANS:diminutive
TOSSUP: What was the porta Libitinesis in the arena? ANS:gate in which the dead were dragged out
BONUS: What are the following a group of: russata. albata, veneta. and prasina? ANS:factiones
TOSSUP: Which of the following battles is not matched with
the correct date: Pharsalus 48 BC, Thapsus 46 BC, Munda
45 BC, Dyrrhachium 47 BC or Ilerda 49 BC? ANS: Dyrrhachium
BONUS: At what battle did Caesar defeat Afranius
and Petreius? ANS:Ilerda
TOSSUP: The Aeneid ends with the death of Turnus. What
caused Aeneas not to be merciful to Turnus when he

pleaded for his life? ANS:Aeneas saw that Turnus was wearing the belt of Pallas, son of Evander who was killed by Turnus
BONUS: Who was the nymph that was the sister of
Turnus? ANS:Juturna
TOSSUP: What Greek, whose very name suggests a snake, is
left behind by the Greeks so that he could trick the
Trojans into bringing the Trojan horse into Troy? ANS:Sinon
BONUS: Who was the builder of the Trojan horse?
ANS:Epeus
TOSSUP: What was the room adjacent to the palaestra where
the dirt and sweat of exercise was removed with the
strigilis? ANS:destrictarium
BONUS: Give the Latin verb at the root of
•aestrictarius? ANS:stringoiaestringo
TOSSUP: Translate the following famous line of Horace:
carpe diem, quam minium credula postero. ANS:seize the day, trusting as little as possible in the future
BONUS: Give the first three words of the poem from
which the previous sentence is taken. ANS:Tu ne quaesieris


TOSSUP: Pronunce the accentuation difference between (spell for the
contestants) c-a-t-u-l-u-s and c-a-t-u-I-I-u-s ANS:[no answerline, I left it because it's a funny question]
BONUS: How is a syllable long by position: ANS:(vowel is followed by two or double consonants -refinements of this rule do not need to be stated)
TOSSUP: Using "accido" say in Latin, "it happens that I am not very
friendly" ANS:(accidit ut non sim amicissimus)
BONUS: Translate that same sentence with accido in the perfect
tense: ANS:accidit ut non essem amicissimus.
TOSSUP: Most of you have known the saying ab ova usque ad mala since your
first yar in Latin. Who is the author of this saying. ANS:Horace
BONUS: To whom do we owe the saying salus papuli suprema lex.
ANS:(Cicero)
TOSSUP: Give the rare future passive infinitive of the verb tollo: 
ANS: sublatum iri
BONUS: What are the grammtical parts out of which this form is
made: ANS:accusative supine with passive infinitive of eo
TOSSUP: In a time of recession you may find that your personal finances
will also suffer. If your parents tell you "Peculium tuum dimidiatum
est" what has happened? ANS: (your allowance has been cut in half insist upon the 'cut in half' or "halved"  peculium can be handled in a variety of ways)
BONUS: Give the famous phrase from Horace in which he uses the
Latin word for 'a half' to describe his friend Vergil' ANS:(meae dimidium
animae)
TOSSUP: Give the subjunctive verb forms in this sentence: Let us go to the
top of the hill to see the plain. ANS:(eamus, videamus)
BONUS: Translate "to see" correctly without using a subjunctive,
gerund, gerundive or infinitive ANS:(visum)
TOSSUP: Whom or'what do Pyramis and Thisbe address in this quote from Ovid:
"Invide paries, quid amantibus obstas" ANS:(the wall that separates them)
BONUS: Translate the sentence ANS:(Hateful wall, why do you stand in the way of lovers?)
S. Give the neuter nominative plural of the following: duo, qui, hic
and ties ANS:(duo, quae, haec, tria)
BONUS: The declension of duo requires the use of archaic dual
forms. What other adjctives is declined just like duo? ANS:ambo
TOSSUP: Translate the object of the verb: "I will use all my strength"

ANS:(viribus)
BONUS: Translate the whole sentence: Utar omnibus viribus meis
TOSSUP: Who was given the epithet "centimanus' (the hundred-handed) for
his broad-minded reforms in land laws, finance, quedcuts, roads,
grammar and even poetry? ANS:Appius Claudius Caecus
BONUS: What kind of handed creatures were the cyclops known as the
gasterocheires ANS:(belly-handed)
TOSSUP: Give the principal parts of the Latin verb from which Augustus
derives: ANS:augeo, augere, auxi, auctum
BONUS: Give a derivative from of augeo from the 4th principal
part: ANS:auction
TOSSUP: Responde Latine: Quot corda habes? ANS:unum
BONUS: Express that question using a dative of possession:ANS:Quot tibi sunt corda?
TOSSUP: The phrase sine sale as used by Catullus does not mean "without
salt" but what? ANS:without wit
BONUS: Give another Latin word, this time in its usual plural
form, which means wit: ANS:facetiae
TOSSUP: Complete this analogy: Amalthea : Zeus :: : Odysseus
ANS:(Eurycleia)
BONUS: Who was Aeneas' nurse? ANS:Caieta
TOSSUP: For what Latin and English does the abbreviation sc. stand?
scilicet or scire licet ANS:you may understand
BONUS: What other similar phrase means "evidently or namely"?
ANS:videlicet

TOSSUP: What city am I? My modern name is Durres and I am the chief port
of Albania. In ancient times, my harbor helped Pompey withstand a
seige by Caesar in 48 BC? ANS:Dyrrachium
BONUS: Whom did Pompey leave in charge of Dyrrhacium in order to
pursue Caesar inland? ANS:Cato

TOSSUP: Tecta and puppis is regularly used by Vergil in what figure of
speech? ANS:synecdoche
BONUS: Give the meaning of each of these when so used:
ANS:houses/buildings and ship

TOSSUP: "Candy is dandy but liquor is quicker" is a poem byt Ogden Nash. If we use "merum" for liquor, how would 'quicker' be translated?
ANS:celerius
BONUS: What is the technical metrical pattern of "how now brown cow" 
ANS:spondaic dimeter
