Yale Ἀγῶν 2017
Round One
1. What Greek poet from Chios famously wrote the Iliad and Odyssey?
HOMER
B1: How many books each comprise the Iliad and Odyssey?
TWENTY FOUR
B2: What mythological conflict in Asia Minor occurs over the course of the Iliad?
TROJAN WAR
2. What famous figure in world history marched all the way to India during his campaigns from
336-323 B.C.?
ALEXANDER THE GREAT
B1: What philosopher famously tutored Alexander the Great?
ARISTOTLE
B2: What woman from Epirus was the mother of Alexander the Great?
OLYMPIAS
3. What derivative of the Greek noun for “child” refers to the practice and study of teaching?
PAEDAGOGY
B1: What derivative of the same Greek noun is the name of a medical professional who deals
exclusively with children?
PEDIATRICIAN
B2: What other derivative of the same Greek noun refers to a person who is excessively
concerned with minor details and rules?
PEDANT
4. What fleeing couple did Apollo jealously follow all the way to Messene before Zeus
intervened and let the maiden pick her lover?
IDAS & MARPESSA
B1:Whom did Marpessa choose and why?
IDAS; SHE FEARED THAT APOLLO WOULD ABANDON HER
WHEN SHE GREW OLD
B2: Name the father of Marpessa who also followed the couple as far as the Lycormas River.
EVENUS
5. For the verb ποιέω, give the 1st person plural present active indicative.
ποιοῦμεν
B1: Make that form Future.
ποιήσομεν
B2: Make that form Aorist and Middle.
ε
ποιησάμεθα
6. What famous structure in Athens was dedicated to Athena and sits atop the acropolis to this
day?
PARTHENON
B1: What famous Athenian strategos commissioned the construction of the parthenon?
PERICLES
B2: According to Plutarch, how did Pericles die in 429 B.C.?
PLAGUE
7. Who, because he had no horses to offer, instead foolishly promised to give King Polydectes
whatever else he desired, and was thus sent to retrieve the head of Medusa?
PERSEUS
B1: Following Athena’s advice, Perseus first travelled to Libya to seek further directions from
what group of women?
GRAEAE
B2: What deity, upon learning that Perseus was a son of Zeus, refused to house him and was
thereupon turned to stone?
ATLAS
8. What case is governed by the preposition ε
ν?
DATIVE
B1: What case is governed by the preposition ε
πί when found in phrases such as “in the time
of Cyrus?”
GENITIVE
B2: What case is governed by the preposition μετά when it means “after?”
ACCUSATIVE
9. What Greek poetess, one of the only known women in the canon of Greek literature, wrote
lyric poetry about love and women?
SAPPHO
B1: What Theban poet wrote odes to the winners of Olympic games?
PINDAR
B2: What island, which has the city of Mytilene as it’s capital, was the home of Sappho?
LESBOS
10. Translate the following sentence into Attic Greek. The general praised the soldier.
ο
 στρατηγὸς τὸν στρατιώτην ε
πήνεσε.
Β1: Change that sentence to the Future.
ο
 στρατηγὸς τὸν στρατιώτην ε
παινήσει.
B2: Make that sentence plural.
οι
 στρατηγοι ̀τοὺς στρατιώτας ε
παινήσουσιν
11. What famous Greek play concerns the title character’s attempts to bury her brother
Polyneices, who has been left to rot on the field outside Thebes by the regent Creon?
ANTIGONE
B1: What playwright authored Antigone as well as two preceding plays which made up his
Theban trilogy?
SOPHOCLES
B2: What collective role common in Greek plays was performed by a group of Theban elders
in Antigone?
CHORUS
12. What deity travelled from his birthplace of Cyllene to Pieria on his first day of life in order
to fulfill his thievish desires?
HERMES
B1: What was Hermes intending to steal in Pieria?
APOLLO’S CATTLE
B2: How did Hermes attempt to confuse his trail when he later drove the cattle to the Alpheus
river?
HE DROVE THEM BACKWARD / HE WORE BRUSHWOOD SANDALS
(TO OBSCURE HIS FOOTPRINTS)
13. Translate the relative pronoun into Greek for the following sentence: The women, whose
dogs we saved, thanked us.
ὡ̃ν
B1: Translate the relative pronoun into Greek for this sentence: The men, whom the women
saved, thanked them.
οὕς
B2: Translate the relative pronoun into Greek for this sentence: The general laid siege to
Thebes, which was a wealthy city.
η
́
14. What war broke out when Ionian Greeks in Asia Minor captured and burned Sardis,
prompting King Darius I to declare war on mainland Greece?
PERSIAN WAR
B1: What battle of 490 B.C. pitted the Athenian strategos Miltiades against Persian generals
on a plain about 26 miles northwest of Athens?
MARATHON
B2: What king succeeded Darius I in 486 B.C. and prepared for a second invasion of Greece a
decade later?
XERXES
15. Τί Α
́
γγλικη σεμαίνει θεός;
GOD
B1: Τί Α
́
γγλικη σεμαίνει λίθος;
STONE
B2: Τί Α
́
γγλικη σεμαίνει ε
́
θνος;
RACE / PEOPLE
16. What tall vessel carried by two handles was primarily used for transporting and storing wine
and olive oil?
AMPHORA
B1: What name is given to the large open bowl used for mixing wine with water?
KRATER
B2: What name is given to the wide shallow drinking cup with two horizontal handles?
KYLIX
17. What Greek city in the Peloponnesus was known for its militaristic values?
SPARTA
B1: According to its governmental structure, how many kings ruled Sparta at a time?
TWO
B2: What famous king and protagonist of the movie 300 was the leader of the Greeks at the
Battle of Thermopylae?
LEONIDAS
18. What Eleusinian brigand, though he is sometimes called Damastes or Polypemon, is more
often known by his nickname meaning “Stretcher”?
PROCRUSTES
B1: Who, a son of another man named Polypemon, was known to tie his victims’ limbs to
bent trees and thereby tear their bodies apart?
SINIS
B2: What nickname, which means “Pinebender” was given to Sinis for this brutality?
PITYOCAMPTES
19. For the phrase τὸ α
γαθὸν δῶρον, give the Accusative singular.
τὸ α
γαθὸν δῶρον
B1: Make that phrase Genitive plural.
τῶν α
γαθῶν δώρων
B2: Make that phrase Nominative.
τὰ α
γαθὰ δῶρα
20. What philosopher was charged with corrupting the youth and put to death by hemlock
poison in 399 B.C.?
SOCRATES
B1: What disciple of Socrates wrote the Allegory of the Cave?
PLATO
B2: What dialogue of Plato written around 380 B.C. was likely the model for Cicero’s De Re
Publica?
REPUBLIC

Yale Certamen 2017
WSOA - Exhibition Round
1. We’ll start you off with an easy one. What is the meaning of the Greek noun “ἀγών ?”
ASSEMBLY / COMPETITION / STRUGGLE
B1: Now make the phrase “τό αληθές ἀγών ” genitive.
του αληθούς ἁγῶνος
B2: Make that phrase plural.
τῶν αληθών ἀγώνων
2. What derivative of the Greek noun ἀγών could describe an emotion you might be
experiencing while playing this game, a kind of excruciating and prolonged pain?
AGONY
B1: What noun, a derivative of ἀγών, might describe your relationship with the team(s)
who are opposing you in this round?
ANTAGONISM
B2: What other derivative of ἀγών, directly related to a Greek word meaning “second
actor,” often refers to the sidekick of the main character in literature?
DEUTERAGONIST
3. In the Iliad, what pugnacious river tried to kill Achilles out of fury that he was polluting
his waters with dead bodies?
SCAMANDER
B1: With what river did Heracles fight over the nymph Deianeira, tearing off one of his
horns?
ACHELOUS
B2: What man transformed into a river in order to pursue the nymph Arethusa, who had
fled from him to Ortygia and turned herself into a well? As a river, he was later used by
Heracles to clean the Augean Stables. This guy really couldn’t catch a break.
ALPHEUS
4. Place the following battles of Alexander the Great in chronological order: Issus,
Gaugamela, Granicus River, Tyre.
GRANICUS RIVER, ISSUS, TYRE, GAUGAMELA
B1: After which of the following battles in the toss-up did Alexander the Great capture,
and later marry, Darius’s daughter, Stateira?
ISSUS
B2: Who was the satrap of Bactria who murdered Darius after Gaugamela and
proclaimed himself King of Persia?
BESSUS
5. Time for some derivatives. What basketball stat, in which Andre Drummond leads the
NBA this year, is derived from the noun “βόμβος,” meaning “a booming?”
REBOUND
B1: What derivative of the adjective “κρυπτός” is a “a small picturesque cave, especially
an artificial one in a park or garden?”
GROTTO
B2: Sometimes words may be derived from place names, as well. What word, meaning
“following a winding course,” is derived from a namesake river in Asia Minor?
MEANDER / MAEANDER
6. Please translate Fragment 159 of Sappho, σύ τε κἄμος θεράπων Ἔρος.
YOU AND MY SERVANT EROS
B1: Now translate Fragment 146 of Sappho, μήτε μοι μέλι μήτε μέλισσα.
NEITHER BEE NOR HONEY FOR ME
B2: Now translate Fragment 160 of Sappho, τάδε νῦν ἐταίραις ταὶς ἔμαις τέρπνα
κάλως ἀείσω.
NOW I SING THESE DELIGHTFUL THINGS FOR/TO MY COMPANIONS
7. Herodotus was a crazy guy. In this question, we’ll test you on some of his most
interesting stories. What ruler of Lydia was told that “a great empire will fall if you attack
the Persians?” He immediately attacked but lost horribly, causing his own great empire to
fall.
CROESUS
B1: What poet, credited with inventing the dithyramb, was carried on the back of a
dolphin to Taenarum after he escaped his captors?
ARION
B2: In what tribe, also found in Herodotus, did the men birth the children? Apollonius
Rhodius describes the practice as: “Here when wives bring forth children to their
husbands, the men lie in bed and groan with their heads close bound; but the women tend
them with food, and prepare child-birth baths for them.”
TIBARENI
8. In regular Certamen, one will often run into Cinema Romana questions, in which
popular movie titles are translated into Latin for players to identify. Well, since this
Agon, welcome back to κῑ́νημᾰ ἑλληνική , Disney edition. What recent re-released
Disney classic might have been known to the Greeks as “τό κάλλος καὶ τό ζῷον ?”
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
B1: What Disney movie might have been called “ὁ τῶν λεοντών βασιλεύς ?”
THE LION KING
B2: What hugely inaccurate film might have been called “ὁ Ἡρακλῆς ?”
HERCULES
9. What large festival in Athens was held in honor of Dionysus and was centered around the
theatrical performances of comedies and tragedies?
DIONYSIA
B1: What private women’s festival, dedicated to Demeter and Persephone, involved the
hurling of pigs into pits called megara? This festival is discussed both in a play by
Aristophanes and a speech of Lysias.
THESMOPHORIA
B2: What secret initiations were held every year for the cult of Demeter, Persephone, and
Triptolemus, to whom Demeter was said to have taught the art of agriculture?
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES
10. Turns out, I know nothing about Greek history, so here are some Roman history
questions with tangential relations to Greece! What city on the Peloponnese, proverbial
for its opulence, was destroyed by the Romans under L. Mummius in 146 B.C.?
CORINTH
B1: What king of the Seleucids did the Romans defeat in a war lasting from 191-188
B.C.?
ANTIOCHUS III / THE GREAT
B2: Book IX of Livy contains a digression on what man, whom Livy decides the Romans
could easily have beaten if he had only turned westward?
ALEXANDER THE GREAT
11. Please give, IN REVERSE ORDER, ALL the principle parts for the verb φέρω, meaning
“to bear.”
φέρω, οἴσω, ἤνεγκα/ἤνεγκον, ἐνήνοχα, ἐνήνεγμαι, ἠνέχθην
B1: Now give, in reverse order, ALL the principle parts for the verb λέγω, meaning “to
say.”
λέγω, λέξω/ἐρῶ, ἔλεξα/εἶπον, εἴρηκα, εἴρημαι/λέλεγμαι, ἐρρήθην/ἐλέχθην
B2: Now give ALL the principle parts for the verb γίγνομαι, meaning “to become”
γίγνομαι, γενήσομαι, 2 aor. ἐγενόμην, γέγονα, γεγένημαι, ἐγενήθην
12. What Greek author from Eleusis fathered the child Euphorion, who may have actually
written his Prometheus Bound, and scripted The Persians, our only surviving classical
Greek tragedy concerned with contemporary events?
AESCHYLUS
B1: What trilogy of Greek tragedies by Aeschylus concerns the murder of Agamemnon
by Clytemnestra?
ORESTEIA
B2: In which play of the Oresteia trilogy, the second, does Orestes meet Electra while
she visits Agamemnon’s grave?
LIBATION BEARERS
13. What king of Cyprus duped Agamemnon by promising fifty ships for the Trojan War but
instead sending forty-nine made of clay – which of course dissolved upon launch?
CINYRAS
B1. Who bought his way out of Troy by presenting Agamemnon with a fine mare?
ECHEPOLUS
B2. Who foiled Odysseus’ plot to avoid fighting at Troy by throwing his infant son down
in front of his plow when he pretended to plow his fields with salt out of insanity?
PALAMEDES
14. Now we’ll have a Dramatic Interpretation question! For the toss-up and each of the boni,
we will have each team select one member as a θυσία (sacrifice). The two selected
members will perform, in Greek, a stichomythia from a tragedy of Euripides. The
remaining members of each team will guess what tragedy they are performing--so choose
your actors wisely! Whoever correctly shouts out the name of the tragedy will earn the
points for their team.
Actors, make sure you read the Greek: we have included the English to aid your
performance.
MEDEA
B1:
BACCHAE
B2:
HELEN
15. Who, the son of Cleombrotus, was sent to free Cyprus from the Persians, but was accused
of conniving with Xerxes, and boarded himself up within the Brazen House of Athena to
escape prosecution?
PAUSANIAS
B1: Which city, along the Hellespont, did Pausanias succeed in resting control over from
the Persians in 479 BC, and go on to rule for a brief period of time?
BYZANTIUM
B2: Who, son of Miltiades, was sent in 476 BC to drive Pausanias out of Byzantium?
CIMON
16. What did the scholar Archimedes purportedly shout when he stepped into a bath and
noticed that the water level rose in accordance with his body volume? This one word
exclamation is now the motto of California.
EUREKA
B1: Translate the phrase αἰὲν ἀριστεύειν , which serves as the motto of St. Andrew’s
College and Boston College.
EVER TO EXCEL / ALWAYS TO BE THE BEST
B2: Φιλοσοφία Βίου Κυβερνήτης is the motto of what organization?
PHI BETA KAPPA [DUH, IT’S AN ACRONYM]
17. What god of healing and son of Apollo was smited by one of Zeus’s lightning bolts after
he dared to bring a mortal named Hippolytus back from the dead?
ASCLEPIUS
B1: What man, a member of the Seven Against Thebes, was smote by one of Zeus’s
lightning bolts after he climbed up onto the walls of Thebes and shouted, “Not even Zeus
can stop me now!” Obviously, this was untrue, because he was then smat.
CAPANEUS
B2: What king of Elis was smitten by one of Zeus’s lightning bolts for pretending to be
Zeus, riding through the streets in a jangling chariot, and forcing his servants to throw
torches behind him?
SALMONEUS
18. αἰαῖ αἰαῖ! οἴμοι! ἰώ μοί μοι! oτοτοῖ! What are these sounds meant to evoke?
SORROW/GRIEF/LAMENT/MOURNING/SENIORITIS
B1: On to more sounds. For five points each, what are the sounds βρεκεκεκέξ
and κοάξ meant to signify, respectively?
RIBBIT AND CROAK
19. Differentiate in meaning between φθόνος and πόνος.
ENVY/JEALOUSY AND WORK/LABOR
B1: Differentiate in meaning between πικρός and μικρός.
BITTER AND SMALL
B2: Differentiate in meaning between μέλας and πέλας.
BLACK AND NEARBY
20. What Theban lyric poet, described as writing like a “rushing mountain torrent” by
Horace, wrote many choral works for religious festivals including paeons and hymns but
is perhaps best known for his epinikia or victory odes?
PINDAR
B1: What lyric poet, allegedly struck blind as punishment for besmirching Helen of Troy
in his verses, wrote a poem about the death of the monster Geryon?
STESICHORUS
B2: What lyric poet of Ceos, the uncle of Bacchylides, is credited with inventing the
encomium and wrote victory odes, choral songs, and epitaphs? He is not to be confused
with another poet of a very similar name, who wrote an infamously satirical poem on
types of women.
SIMONIDES