2023 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 1

1.	For the phrase ὁ λόγος, give the accusative singular.
τὸν λόγον
	B1: Now make the phrase τὸν λόγον dative plural.
τοῖς λόγοις

2.	Unlike other poleis, what city founded only one colony at Tarentum, focusing instead on their conquest of Messenia and making a militaristic state rivaling the democratic Athens?
SPARTA
	B1: Sparta had two families of kings, the Agiads and Eurypontids. What Agiad king led the Spartan forces at the battle of Thermopylae?
LEONIDAS

3.	Under the supposed instruction of a poet from Tanagra named Corinna, what author wrote “Pythians,” “Isthmians,” “Nemeans,” and “Olympians” to honor victors in heroic odes?
PINDAR
B1: Pindar’s best-known poem, Olympian 1, was dedicated to what ruler?
{HIERON / HIERO} (I OF SYRACUSE)

4.	From what Greek noun do we derive the words apogee, gnome, George, and geology?
γῆ
	B1:  The name George comes most directly from Greek γεωργός, a compound word meaning “one who works the land.” What other Greek noun supplies the meaning “work” in this word?
ἔργον

5.	After having lived for 7 generations, what seer died after drinking from the spring Telphusa while escaping the Epigoni?
TEIRESIAS
B1: What daughter of Teiresias was among the Theban spoils which the Epigoni sent to Delphi as dedications to Apollo?
MANTO
         
6.	What Greek contract verb means “to take” or “to grasp” in the active voice and “to choose” in the middle voice?
αἱρέω
	B1: What compound of αἱρέω means “to take away,” or “to subtract”?
ἀφαιρέω

7.	Who labeled Athens as “the school of Hellas” in a famed funeral oration during the twin calamities of the Great Peloponnesian War and a great plague?
PERICLES
	B1: What post in Athenian government, which held a primarily martial connotation, did Pericles hold every year from 444-429 BC?
STRATEGOS

8.	A poem beginning φαίνεταί μοι in Greek and  “Ille mī pār esse deō vidētur” in its Latin adaptation by Catullus is one of the most famous love poems by what “tenth Muse” from Lesbos?
SAPPHO
B1: Sappho was a contemporary of what male lyric poet from Lesbos, who inspired Horace’s line “nunc est bibendum”?
ALCAEUS

9.	What case in Greek is primarily used to express separation, alongside its more familiar meaning of possession?
GENITIVE
	B1: What case in Greek would be used to translate “points” in the sentence “We will win this round by 200 points”?
DATIVE

10.	Book 5 of the Iliad focuses on what Greek warrior, who was able to wound two gods on the battlefield, although he might be more famous for his night raid with Odysseus in Book 10?
DIOMEDES
B1: During the night raid, Odysseus and Diomedes caught what Trojan spy who had been promised Achilles’ horses?
DOLON

11.	Onomarchus was the only man to defeat what Macedonian, who himself had defeated the combined forces of Athens and Thebes at Chaeronea, shortly before his son Alexander the Great took power?
PHILIP II
	B1: What orator rivaled Isocrates, speaking out against Philip and the Macedonians?
DEMOSTHENES

12.	Varieties of what type of object could include “volutes,” might be adorned by grooves known as “fluting,” and were divided into three main orders — Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian?
COLUMN(S) / PILLAR(S) / PILASTER(S)
	B1: What name is given to the statues of women that took the place of columns in certain Greek buildings, as in the Porch of the Maidens on the Acropolis?
CARYATID(S)

13.	Using a form of αὐτὸς, please say in Attic Greek, “we are looking at the same wall.”
τὸ αὐτὸ τεῖχος {βλέπομεν / ὁρῶμεν} 
	B1: Without using a verb, please say in Attic Greek, “the sun is very beautiful.”
ὁ ἥλιος κάλλιστος // κάλλιστος ὁ ἥλιος  // ὁ ἥλιος μάλιστα καλός // μάλιστα καλός ὁ ἥλιος 
	
14.	A famous poetry contest is said to have taken place between what two authors, one, who talks of the five ages of man and wrote a Works and Days, and the other, a blind poet who sang of Achilles and Odysseus?
HESIOD and HOMER
B1: What set of works, addressed to various Olympians, is attributed to Homer at least in name?
HOMERIC HYMNS
	
15.	Dodonian oak made up the masthead of what man’s ship, carrying him and the other crewmembers to Colchis from Iolcus on Pelias’ order to retrieve the Golden Fleece?
JASON
B1: From what island beloved by Hera did the Argonaut Ancaeus hail from? This island’s inhabitants were also said to have given their name to the Samothracian mystery cult Orpheus initiated the Argonauts into.
SAMOS

2023 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 2

1.	After the First Peloponnesian War, Athens gained control of all of Boeotia barring what city, which prospered under Epaminondas and lost its eponymous sacred band at Chaeronea?
THEBES
	B1: What battle in 371 B.C. saw the Thebans under Epaminondas defeat the Spartans?
LEUCTRA

2.	Differentiate in meaning between λαμβάνω and λανθάνω.
TO TAKE/GRAB // RECEIVE/GET and TO ESCAPE NOTICE OF
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between πίπτω and πιστεύω
TO FALL and TO TRUST/RELY ON/BELIEVE IN

3.	What city, whose own name was combined with the prefix “Acro-” to designate its acropolis, controlled the passage from mainland Greece to the Peloponnese via a narrow strip of land called its “isthmus”?
CORINTH
	B1: What city dominated the region that lay between Attica and Corinthia?
MEGARA

4.	Puzzled by the Delphic Oracle’s warning not to loosen the foot of the wineskin, who stopped at Troezen on his return to Athens to consult the wise king Pittheus?
AEGEUS
B1: Pittheus, understanding the true meaning of the oracle, tricked Aegeus into spending the night with what princess of Troezen?
AETHRA

5.	The brother of Cynegirus, what man wrote the only extant historical tragedy, as well as his Oresteia trilogy?
AESCHYLUS
B1: Aeschylus wrote a play which opens on Cratus and Bia restraining what titular mythical figure to a mountain?
PROMETHEUS
         
6.	Give the meaning of the Greek word removed from the blanks in these phrases: “[blank] ἄγαν” and “ἓν οἶδα ὅτι [blank] οἶδα” — μηδὲν and οὐδὲν. 
NOTHING
	
B1: What is the meaning of the verb ῥεῖ in this phrase from the philosopher Heraclitus: “τὰ πάντα ῥεῖ καὶ οὐδὲν μένει”?
FLOW(S) // (IS IN) FLUX

7.	What group consists of Bias; the tyrant of Mytilene, Pittacus; a philosopher from Miletus, Thales; and an Athenian law-giver, Solon?
SEVEN SAGES
	Β1: The pre-Socratic philosopher Thales believed all things to be made of what substance?
WATER

8.	What figure crafted the ostracisms of Megacles, Xanthippus, and Aristides, but is most famous for “putting his faith in the wooden walls”, leading him to build Athens’ navy?
THEMISTOCLES
	B1: At what naval battle did Themistocles defeat the Persians in 480 B.C.?
SALAMIS

9.	Grain growing without any plows, goats frolicking due to lack of hunters, and rams large enough to hide men beneath them, are all features of the island inhabited by what being and his Cyclopean brethren?
POLYPHEMUS
B1: The Cyclopes were alerted to the presence of what man due to Polyphemus’ exclamations?
NO MAN (ACCEPT EQUIVALENTS LIKE “NOBODY, NO ONE”, ETC.)

10.	Please provide the 2nd person singular dative personal pronoun.
σοί / σοι
	B1: Please make that form plural.
ὑμῖν

11.	Who, despite the help of the herdsman Menoetes, the herdsman Eurytion, and the two-headed dog Orthus, was unable to protect his cattle when Heracles came for his 10th labor?
GERYON
B1: The herdsman Menoetes actually served which god, whom Heracles may have wounded during a later labor?
HADES

12.	The ring of Gyges, the myth of Er, and the allegory of the cave are all stories found in what work of Plato, that determines the rule of the greatest philosopher to be the perfect government?
REPUBLIC / POLITEIA
	
B1: What figure names a dialogue of Plato that sees the eponymous figure discuss with Socrates whether escaping prison would be a just act?
CRITO

13.	What is the meaning of the Greek verb at the roots of “emblem” and “diabolical,” βάλλω?
TO THROW
	B1: From what Greek verb with what meaning do we derive “dogma”? 
δοκέω — (TO) THINK / SEEM
	
14.	What group, which were originally Messenians, fought under Aristomenes and capitalized on an earthquake in 464 B.C. to rebel and secure their freedom from the Spartans?
HELOTS
	B1: What Spartan is said to have instituted the agoge after the first helot rebellion?
LYCURGUS
	
15.	When recognized by the spotter, perform the following command, keeping in mind that σύμμαχος means “teammate” here: τὸ ὄνομά σου λέγε τοῖς συμμάχοις.
PLAYER SHOULD TELL THEIR TEAMMATES THEIR NAME
	B1: Now perform the following commands, taking ἄρχων to mean “moderator”: στῆτε, βαίνετε πρὸς τὸν ἄρχοντα, καὶ πίπτετε.
ALL PLAYERS SHOULD STAND, WALK TOWARD THE MODERATOR, AND FALL DOWN

2023 NJCL Ἀγών
SEMIFINAL ROUND
	
1.	What work of Euripides sees the main character use an extra day in Corinth to set out her plan on how to get revenge on her husband, which culminates in her murdering her two children?
MEDEA
B1: To what city does Medea escape after murdering Creon, Glauce, and her two sons?
ATHENS

2.	Perhaps dying during a fight with Aphareus’s sons Idas and Lynceus, what pair of brothers were famous for being a horse-tamer and a boxer and were the sons of Tyndareus and Leda?
CASTOR AND POLYDEUCES
B1: Polydeuces got to show off his boxing skills when he defeated an enemy of the Argonauts. Give either the name of the enemy or the tribe he ruled over.
AMYCUS or BEBRYCES

3.	“I’m thankful for my W rizz!” From what Greek word, meaning “favor” or “thanks,” do we derive the colloquialism “rizz,” thought to be a shortening of “charisma”?
χάρις
	B1: On hot Atlanta days like these, it’s always important to drink plenty of water. From what Greek word, meaning “water,” do we derive hydrated, hydrogen, and fire hydrant?
ὕδωρ

4.	What man, who advised Sparta to fortify Decelea, was eventually recalled by Athens to lead them at Cyzicus and Notion a few years after he famously vandalized some statues of Hermes?
ALCIBIADES
	B1: Alcibiades also advised Sparta to fortify what city, which the mothax Gylippus defended?
SYRACUSE

5.	Please provide the form of the adjective αἴτιος that agrees with the accusative singular of the Greek noun meaning soldier, στρατιώτην.
GREEKANS:αἰτίoν
	B1: What is the vocative singular of στρατιώτης?
στρατιῶτα


6.	What lyric poet, said to have been from Southern Italy, was influenced heavily by epic, writing long poems on mythical themes, including one work that according to legend slandered Helen and led to its author’s blindness?
STESICHORUS
	B1: What Spartan lyric poet was known for writing hymns, wedding songs, and most famously songs that were sung by a chorus of girls on religious holidays, called partheneia?
ALCMAN

7.	Prior to the Gigantomachy, Eos, Helius, and Selene were forbidden to grant light to whom while she was searching for a plant which would grant immortality to her children against the gods?
GE / GAEA
B1: Who instead found this plant, ensuring a victory for the gods against the Giants?
ZEUS

8.	Differentiate in meaning between the verbs μένω and μέλλω respectively.
WAIT & BE ABOUT TO // DELAY
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between the verbs ἐράω and ἐρωτάω respectively.
LOVE & ASK/INQUIRE

9.	What city refused to allow Alexander to sacrifice to Melqart, prompting him to lay siege to it for seven months, eventually building a causeway to reach that Egyptian city?
TYRE
	B1: Alexander founded Alexandria during his time in Egypt, near the village of Rhakotis. Rhakotis was near what mythological island mentioned by Homer?
PHAROS

10.	An Athenian prince raised by his grandfather in Euboea upon his father’s exile and an Eleusinian prince who died in a fire when his mother interrupted a goddess’ attempt to immortalize him both share what name in mythology?
DEMOPHO(Ö)N
B1: Name the mother of either Demophon.
PHAEDRA / ANTIOPE / METANEIRA

11.	Only one work, which was rediscovered on some Egyptian papyri in the twentieth century and concerns a grouchy old man called Κνήμων, survives from whom, someone often called the best playwright of Attic New Comedy?
MENANDER

B1: The Archarnians, a somewhat lesser known play of Aristophanes, comedically tackles, like its famous cousin, the Lysistrata, the conflict between what two states?
SPARTA AND ATHENS

12.	What term describes words such as φημί, εἰμί, γε, and τε, which are seen as joining with the previous word and thus lack their own accent?
ENCLITIC(S)
	B1: There are also proclitics, words which lack their own accent because they are seen as joining with the following word. Of the forms μοι, δέ, τις, ἐξ, and ὡς, which is neither an enclitic nor a proclitic and thus always has an accent? 
δέ

13.	What king sent the general Datis with 30,000 men to Athens which culminated in the Battle of Marathon?
DARIUS I
	B1: What runner did the Athenians send to Sparta to ask for reinforcements?
PHILIPPIDES / PHEIDIPPIDES

14.	What general event featured an ἐγγύη and later an ἔκδοσις but ultimately culminated in a procession accompanied by the Ὑμέναιος before the central figures entered the θάλαμος together?
MARRIAGE / WEDDING
	B1: What was the song sung during the time the new couple was in the θάλαμος?
ἐπιθαλάμιον

15.	Translate the following sentence from Greek into English: ὁ θυμὸς με κελεύει ἡγεῖσθαι
{MY / THE} SPIRIT ORDERS ME TO LEAD
	Β1: δεῖ ἡμῖν μὴ εἶναι κακοῖς.
IT IS NECESSARY FOR US NOT TO BE BAD
2023 NJCL Ἀγών
 FINAL ROUND 

1.	What island hosted a man with a smelly wound — Philoctetes, the king Thoas who was hidden in a chest to avoid being killed by the women, and the Argonauts for a whole year under Hypsipyle?
LEMNOS
B1: Sometimes it was not Philoctetes but what father of his who first acquired the bow of Heracles?
POEAS

2.	What Athenian admiral, who had fled from the aftermath of the battle of Aegospotami, commanded a Persian-allied fleet that crushed the Spartans at the battle of Cnidus in 394 BC?
CONON
	B1: What famed Spartan was killed at the siege of Haliartus in 395 BC?
LYSANDER

3.	What city’s literature is associated with intertextual allusiveness, erudite recounting of local legends, and antiquarian interests, both in the Aetia of Callimachus and longer epics like the Argonautica?
ALEXANDRIA
B1: The Alexandrians were fond of subverting the heroic qualities of myths. What Sicilian poet associated with Alexandria places the Cyclops Polyphemus into a pastoral love story in one of his Idylls?
THEOCRITUS

4.	Note to players: there will be an extra clue after the sentence. Say in idiomatic Greek: “They will ransom the child.” Note that you need to use the middle voice of λύω.
{τὸν παῖδα // τὸ παιδίον} λύσονται
	B1: Using the adjective βραδύς, say in Greek: “They pursued the slow goddess.”
ἐδίωξαν τὴν βραδεῖαν θεάν

5.	What nightingale of Ceos would not only write hymns, but also odes for victors at games at the same time as Pindar and was coincidentally a nephew of Simonides?
BACCHYLIDES
B1: What island was home to an elegiac poet from Samos, Semonides, who lived in the 7th century B.C.?
AMORGOS

6.	The fortification of Trapezus and the introduction of the arts of bread-making and weaving to the Pelasgians are both attributed to what hunter and son of Zeus?
ARCAS
B1: The Arcadians claimed that the city of Trapezus also served as the site where what individual led a small earthborn contingent in defense of Rhea against Kronos’ wrath while she gave birth to Zeus?
HOPLODAMUS

7.	Give the genitive and dual of the phrase “some person,” that is, ἄνθρωπος τις.
ἀνθρώποιν τινοῖν [DO NOT ACCEPT τινοιν ἀνθρώποιν—
ENCLITICS CANNOT BEGIN SENTENCES OR PHRASES]
	B1: In the phrase ἀνθρώποιν τινοῖν, identify the type and location of the accent, if any, that τινοῖν receives?
CIRCUMFLEX ON ULTIMA // PERISPOMENON // CIRCUMFLEX ON FINAL SYLLABLE

8.	What Dorian city was originally ruled by the Bacchiads until a man who had been hidden in a chest as a child — Cypselus, overthrew them and was later succeeded by his son Periander?
CORINTH
	B1: What was one of the first colonies founded alongside Syracuse by Corinth?
CORCYRA

9.	What island — which made up half of the Dorian Hexapolis with its cities of Ialysus, Camirus, and Lindus — asked Chares to design a monument that was dedicated to Helios and stood in its harbor?
RHODES
	B1: Name any of the remaining three cities in the Dorian Hexapolis, which included two nearby mainland cities and one city on a namesake island to Rhodes’ northwest.
HALICARNASSUS / CNIDUS / COS

10.	Which of the following words is not derived from a Greek verb: “compose,” “pause,” “puzzle,” and “prose”?
PROSE
B1: The forms ending in -position, like “composition” and “exposition,” do come from the Latin compōnere and expōnere. The specific forms “compose” and “expose,” however, ultimately come from a Greek verb. Give this verb and its meaning.
παύω, MAKE TO END // PUT TO AN END

11.	What type of substance, which the quarreling Heraclids used to determine the rightful rulers of Argos, Sparta, and Messenia, did a Titan find at Panopea and use to create the first humans?
CLAY
B1: Which mortal, whom Prometheus hid from Zeus because of his handsome appearance, was carried off to heaven and became a planet?
PHAENON

12.	What mood is used for all of the following constructions: indirect question in primary sequence, contrary-to-fact conditionals, indirect statements with ὅτι, and simple declarations?
INDICATIVE
	B1: What mood in Greek can also be used for some of these clauses, specifically indirect question and indirect statements with ὅτι, when transferring them into secondary sequence?
OPTATIVE

13.	Though his lack of nerve made it hard for him to deliver orations publicly, what pro-Macedonian orator advocated for Greece to reunite under one leader in his Panegyricus?
ISOCRATES
B1: Which orator is praised by ancient critics for his simple, flowing sentences and his ability to tailor his style to his clients, including when wrote Euphiletus’s defense speech for killing his wife’s lover?
LYSIAS

14.	What battle near Babylon saw Artaxerxes and an army of mercenaries under Cyrus clash in 401 B.C., before Xenophon took command and led the mercenaries on the march of the 10,000?
CUNAXA
	B1: What did the mercenaries famously cry when they reached the Black Sea?
THALASSA, THALASSA // THALATTA, THALATTA

15.	Translate the following sentence from Greek into English: οὗτος ὁ στρατηγὸς κρείττων ἐστὶν ἢ ἐκεῖνος.
THIS GENERAL IS STRONGER THAN THAT ONE
B1: Now translate this sentence from Greek into English: οὗτός ἐστιν ἐκεῖνος ὃν σὺ ἐζήτεις.
THIS IS THAT ONE (WHOM) YOU WERE LOOKING FOR

16.	Hair loss, leprous skin, and hallucinations of themselves as cows were indignities suffered by the daughters of King Proetus until what seer, along with his brother Bias, cured them?
MELAMPUS
B1: What son of Phylacus and Clymene, who could run on the tops of wheat and asphodel without breaking the stems, did Melampus also cure of impotence?
IPHICLUS	

17.	Abstaining from beans is a widely mocked feature of the doctrine associated with what philosopher, who was also ridiculed by Xenophanes for his theory that the soul moves to a different body after death, i.e., that it transmigrates?
PYTHAGORAS
B1: The Presocratic philosophers oftentimes come across as pretty wacky. Believing he was a god, which Presocratic jumped into the crater of Mt. Etna, a volcano you may recall, to prove his immortality?
EMPEDOCLES

18.	Complete the following analogy: ἰσχύς:ἰσχυρός::πόνος:_____.
πονηρός [strictly < πονέω < πόνος]
	B1: Complete the following analogy: ἰσχύς:ἰσχυρός::φαίνω:_____.
φανερός

19.	What institution was originally proposed by Draconides and briefly ruled in Athens after the Second Peloponnesian War?
THIRTY TYRANTS
	B1: Who led the Athenian rebels that overthrew the Thirty Tyrants?
THRASYBULUS

20.	What meaning is shared between the poetic verbs ῥέζω, ἔρδω, and δράω, as well as the more common prosaic verb at the root of πρᾶγμα?
TO DO
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between the verbs χράομαι and κτάομαι.
USE and ACQUIRE, RESPECTIVELY
