2020 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 1

1.	Themistocles, Aeschylus, Aristides, Callimachus, and Miltiades all took part in what famous battle in 490 B.C. from which the famous runner Pheidipides ran the famous eponymous run to announce the Greek victory?
MARATHON
	B1: What recently exiled Athenian tyrant was Darius trying to reinstall and make a Persian vassal by fighting at Marathon? He had formerly lost his brother Hipparchus to the tyrannicides Harmodius and Aristogeiton.
HIPPIAS
	B2: Which Athenian polemarch unfortunately died at the battle of Marathon? He shares his name with a famed Hellenistic poet.
CALLIMACHUS

2.	What is the meaning of the preposition ἀπό?
 (AWAY) FROM
	Β1: What is the meaning of the adverb πάλιν?
AGAIN / BACK(WARDS) / ONCE MORE
	B2: What is the meaning of the adverb ἔτι?
STILL / YET / LONGER

3.	Who, the inductor of the Argonauts into the Samothracian mysteries, made a descent into the underworld via the entrance at Taenarum to retrieve his dead wife, Eurydice?
ORPHEUS
	B1: After he had failed to retrieve Eurydice, Orpheus swore off women and lived his days till he was torn apart by the Ciconian women of Thrace. In which river was it said that Orpheus’ head floated, still singing?
HEBRUS
	B2: Finally, the head was said to have floated until it reached which island, home to the famous ancient poet Terpander?
LESBOS

4.	Which work opens up with the line “μῆνιν ἄειδε θεὰ Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος” and details the war between the Achaeans and the Trojans?
ILIAD
	B1: Which book of the Iliad contains the so-called “catalogue of ships” as Homer details who had come to Troy, with how many ships they had come, and from where they had come?
2nd / β
	B2: The impact of the Iliad was not hard to notice. What famous leader in the Classical age of Greece was said to have carried a copy with him in a jeweled casket and made Achilles his role model?
ALEXANDER THE GREAT

5.	Translate the well-known phrase from the Greek world attributed to Thales by Diogenes Laertius and supposedly inscribed on Apollo's temple at Delphi, which in Greek is γνῶθι σαυτόν.
KNOW THYSELF
B1: Translate the word καλλίστῃ into English, which indirectly caused a war and sailed a thousand ships.
TO THE FAIREST
B2: Translate this adaptation of a famous aphorism found in Plato’s Republic, which highlights the merits of hard work: χαλεπά ἐστι τὰ καλά.
DIFFICULT ARE THE BEAUTIFUL/GOOD (THINGS)

         
6.	Which figure in mythology, sometimes said to be a daughter of Eileithyia, carried off a child of Eos to be her priest in Syria, saved the Argonaut Butes, and carried on a lengthy affair with Ares, since she found her husband Hephaestus ugly?  
APHRODITE
	B1: Which mortal did Aphrodite help win Atalanta by giving him golden apples to distract Atalanta with?
MELANION/HIPPOMENES
	B2: When fleeing from Typhon, she and her son Eros were said to have turned into what animals?
FISH

7.	What was the name for the 16-foot-long spear employed by the Macedonians beginning under Philip II?
SARISSA
	B1: What Greek general burned the city of Thebes in 335 B.C.?	              ALEXANDER THE GREAT
	B2: When Alexander burned Thebes, whose house did he leave untouched?
PINDAR’S

8.	Good things often come in threes. What 5th century author gave audiences in 458 BC a glimpse into the chaotic world of mythology after the Trojan War by following the story of Agamemnon’s νόστος, subsequent murder, and the ensuing familial drama across the three tragedies of his Oresteia?
AESCHYLUS
	B1: What are the names of the plays that comprise the Oresteia?
AGAMEMNON / Ἀγαμέμνων, LIBATION-BEARERS / Χοηφόροι, EUMENIDES / Εὐμενίδες
	B2: Tragic trilogies were accompanied by a more light-hearted satyr play during dramatic festivals. The Oresteia is no exception. What is the name of the satyr play that accompanied these tragedies?
PROTEUS / Πρωτεύς

9.	Pedantic individuals are those who are quick to “guide” you to a more nuanced conclusion. The word pedant, as they would tell you, derives from Greek. From what Greek verb, with what meaning does “pedant”, along with the words “strategy”, “agonize”, and “demagogue” derive?
ἄγω - LEAD (NOT DO)
	B1: From what other word, with what meaning, does the word “demagogue” derive?
(ὁ) δῆμος - PEOPLE
	B2: From what other word, with what meaning, does the word “strategy” derive?
(ὁ) στρατός - ARMY / (ὁ) στρατηγός  - GENERAL

10.	In what city would you find the Porch of the Caryatids in the Erechtheum and the statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon?
ATHENS
	B1: What architect designed the Parthenon?
PH(E)IDIAS
	B2: What is notable about the columns in the Porch of the Caryatids?
THEY ARE ALL STATUES OF WOMEN

11.	Since Pithecusae did not last long, which colony in Italy was said to be the first colony established by the Greeks? 
CUMAE/CYME
	B1: Archias was said to have led the Corinthians to found which colony on Sicily that would end up being the largest city in the Greek world in 734 B.C.?
SYRACUSE
	B2: Which colony founded in 707 B.C. by Sparta was their only colony?
TARAS/TARENTUM


12.	What accent in Ancient Greek denotes a rise in pitch on the accented syllable and a fall back to neutral pitch on the following syllable?
ACUTE
B1: What accent in Ancient Greek denotes a quick rise in pitch and fall back to neutral, all of which takes place on a single long syllable?
CIRCUMFLEX
B2: What accent in Ancient Greek is thought not to influence pitch, or to provide only a very slight rise in pitch, and can be found at the end of some words in continuous sentences?
GRAVE

13.	Blood fell from the sky when which Lycian chieftain was slain by Patroclus? He shares his name with a brother of Minos, king of Crete.
SARPEDON
	B1: Who were the parents of the Lycian chieftain?
ZEUS KAI LAODAMEIA
	B2: Which two gods were commanded by Zeus to carry his body to Lycia for burial?
HYPNOS KAI THANATOS

14.	What is the meaning of the Greek verb at the root of synthesis, epithet, and anathema?
TO PUT (τίθημι)
	B1: What is the meaning of the Greek verb at the root of monotony, tune, and hypotenuse?
TO STRETCH (OUT) / STRAIN (τείνω)
	B2: What is the meaning of the Greek verb at the root of devil, parliament, and hyperbole?
TO THROW (βάλλω)

15.	Who was appointed by Ptolemy II Philadelphus in the 3rd century BC to serve as the second head librarian at Alexandria as well as the tutor of Ptolemy III Euergetes, although he is more strongly associated with his four book epic about the world’s first naval adventure, the Argonautica?
APOLLONIUS OF RHODES
	B1: Whom had Apollonius succeeded as head librarian at Alexandria?
ZENODOTUS
	B2: What native of Cyrene served as Apollonius’ tutor in his youth and produced a bibliographic survey of the contents of the library of Alexandria which survives only in name as Πίνακες, but never served as head librarian?
CALLIMACHUS

16.	Make the phrase ὁ ἀγαθὸς υἱóς dative singular.
τῷ ἀγαθῷ υἱῷ
	B1: Make that phrase plural.
τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς υἱοῖς
	B2: Make that phrase genitive.
τῶν ἀγαθῶν υἱῶν

17.	Which hero refused to lead his people against the invading Curetes until his wife convinced him to, took part in the journey of the Argonauts, and killed the Calydonian boar?
MELEAGER
	B1: Who was this wife of his that managed to convince him to fight against the Curetes? She shares her name with a daughter of Boreas.
CLEOPATRA
	B2: For killing which 2 men did Meleager incur the wrath of his mother Althaea?
TOXEUS KAI PLEXIPPUS

18.	Which city reformed their military system and elected Hermocrates as their general before it was to be invaded by Alcibiades, Lamachus, and Nicias in 414 B.C.?
SYRACUSE
	B1: Out of the 3 commanders, which one had been recalled to Athens for the mutilations of the herms?
ALCIBIADES
	B2: Due to Nicias’ gross incompetence, which Locrian man was able to come to Syracuse via the uncompleted wall that Nicias had previously ignored and rally Syracuse to fight off the Athenians on multiple occasions? 
GYLIPPUS

19.	Differentiate in meaning between the words νόμος and μόνος.
CUSTOM/LAW and ALONE
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between the Greek verbs νέμω and μένω.
TO DISPENSE/DISTRIBUTE/PAY/ALLOT // FEED and TO STAY/WAIT
	B2: Differentiate in meaning between εἰμί and εἶμι.
TO BE/I AM and TO (BE ABOUT TO) GO / I (WILL) GO

20.	What philosopher and author, writing in the fourth century BC, examined the scientific applications of music, describing “mathematical harmonics” in his Posterior Analytics and the impact of music on a civilized society in his Politics?
ARISTOTLE
	B1: What successor of Aristotle at the Lyceum, whose tenure there lasted from 322 to 287 BC, wrote a two-book work titled On Music that discussed melody in terms of applied mathematics, although he is far more known for his work in botany, especially the Historia Plantarum?
THEOPHRASTUS
	B2: Who notably had wished to succeed Aristotle himself, and, as the son of a musician from Tarentum, wrote multiple treatises on music, including the Rhythmics and the Elementa Harmonica, and was known to later music scholars simply as “the musician”?
ARISTOXENUS 

2020 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 2

1.	Which of the following words, if any, is not derived from a Greek word meaning “speak”: dialect, electric, lexicon, prolegomenon?
ELECTRIC
	B1: What is the meaning of τὸ ἠλέκτρον from which we derive “electric?”
AMBER
	B2: What derivative of a Greek word meaning “word” is “a relatively short narrative poem resembling an epic in theme, tone, or style?”
EPYLLION (from ἔπος)

2.	Who was purified at Amyclae for a murder he had committed, sued for the hand of an Oechalian princess, boxed Eryx to keep his cattle, and had been with the Argonauts until he left in search of his lover Hylas?
HERACLES
	B1: When Heracles got off at Mysia in search of Hylas, which other Argonaut joined him? He shares his name with a famous cyclops.
POLYPHEMUS
	B2: Later on Heracles killed Ialebion and Dercynus, who were sons of which god? Heracles apparently had an affinity for killing this god’s relations as he also killed Periclymenus, this god’s grandson, who attempted to flee from Heracles in the form of an eagle.
POSEIDON

3.	Translate the following sentence from Greek to English: οἱ ἄνθρωποι ἐν τῇ σκηνῇ θύουσιν.
THE PEOPLE ARE SACRIFICING IN THE TENT [NOT THE PEOPLE IN THE TENT…]
	B1: Translate: οἱ ἐν τῇ σκηνῇ ἄνθρωποι θύουσιν.
THE PEOPLE IN THE TENT ARE SACRIFICING
	B2: What is the syntactic difference between these sentences?
The first is PREDICATIVE; the second is ATTRIBUTIVE // MODIFIES THE VERB IN THE FIRST, THE NOUN IN THE SECOND

4.	2 lines added to the Iliad tell us of how Athens ruled over which city-state that was not incorporated into Attica but was divided in lots among the cleruchs and would later be the site of a naval battle in 480 B.C. where Themistocles led the Greeks to a successful victory over the Persians?
SALAMIS
	B1: The annexation of Salamis was inspired by which Athenian tyrant, who, prior to being tyrant, alongside Solon captured Nisaea, the port city of Megara?
PISISTRATUS
	B2: Which new party did Pisistratus organize to help him achieve supreme power in Athens?
HILL

5.	Although he was a Roman citizen, who is generally excluded from Latin literature since his collection of pairs of biographies of famous Greeks and Romans is written entirely in Greek?
PLUTARCH / PLOUTARCHOS
	B1: What is the title of Plutarch’s collection of historical pairs?
PARALLEL LIVES
	B2: What other work of Plutarch, considered misnamed, is a collection of at least 77 essays in the forms of dialogues, lectures, or letters on a wide variety of topics?
MORALIA

6.	What case do all of the following prepositions take: ἄνευ, ἕνεκα, διά, ἀπό?
GENITIVE
	B1: What case do all of the following prepositions take: διά, εἰς, κατά?
ACCUSATIVE
	B2: What case do the prepositions ἔπι and ἐν take?
DATIVE

7.	70 ships sunken and the death of Callicratidas were seen at what naval battle in 406 B.C. that was followed by such a strong wind from the north that prevented the victorious Athenian generals from recovering their fellow men and their sunken ships?
ARGINUSAE
	B1: How many generals were tried after the battle of Arginusae?
EIGHT
	B2: How many generals after the battle of Arginusae were actually executed?
SIX

8.	Define the Greek noun δοῦλος.
SLAVE
B1: Define the Greek noun δῶρον.
GIFT
B2: Define the Greek adverb δεῦρο.
 (TO) HERE / HITHER(TO)

9.	Socrates never committed any of his own ideas on philosophy to writing. Fortunately, what student of his preserved some Socratean thought by using Socrates as a speaker in many of his dialogues?
PLATO
	B1: Which dialogue of Plato discusses truth and wisdom and is Plato’s account of Socrates’ defense speech in 399 BC?
APOLOGIA / (PLATO’S) APOLOGY
	B2: Which dialogue of Plato discusses death and immortality and takes place in prison the morning of Socrates’ execution?
PHAEDO

10.	What hero distinguished himself on a cattle raid in Elis and won four of the events at the funeral games of Amarynceus while growing up in Gerenia, before settling into his role as the wise king of Pylus?
NESTOR
	B1: According to one tradition, Nestor played such a prominent role in the Iliad and the Odyssey because he was of what relation to Homer?
GRANDFATHER
	B2: What daughter of Nestor was supposedly Homer's mother, although she is better known for having a son, Persepolis, with Telemachus?
POLYCASTE

11.	What king doomed his people by arrogantly misinterpreting an oracle’s advice, starting a war he thought would end the Persians but instead ended the Lydians?
CROESUS
	B1: What capital city of Croesus was captured by the Persians when Cyrus invaded Lydia in retaliation?
SARDIS
	B2: The Oracle of Delphi had told Croesus that if he crossed what river, he would destroy a great civilization?
HALYS

12.	Students of Latin are quite fond of the ablative case and its many functions. Greek, however, has no such case. Rather than the ablative, what Greek case is used to indicate means or instrument?
DATIVE
	B1: Which case assumes the role of agency in Greek rather than the ablative?
GENITIVE
	B2: Which case in Greek is used to indicate degree of difference?
DATIVE

13.	The Babylonians, The Acharnians, The Knights, and The Frogs were all award-winning comedies by what Athenian, considered the greatest comic poet of Old Attic Comedy?
ARISTOPHANES
	B1: In The Frogs, arguably his most famous comedy, Aristophanes portrays the descent of what god into the Underworld?
DIONYSUS
	B2: What play, written after Athens’ disastrous military expedition to Sicily, portrays women forcing their husbands to end a prolonged military conflict?
LYSISTRATA

14.	Identify the case of the form of ἀνήρ in this line from Plato’s Apology: οὐχ ὧδε, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, ἀκούσεσθε κακοὺς λόγους.
VOCATIVE
	B1: Identify the tense of the form of ἀκούω in that same sentence.
FUTURE
	B2: Identify the case and use of the form κακοὺς λόγους in that same sentence.
ACCUSATIVE OF DIRECT OBJECT

15.	A daughter of Hyperphas named Euryganeia is sometimes said to be the wife of which foster son of Merope and Polybus who usually is said to have accidentally bore children with his mother Jocasta?
OEDIPUS
	B1: After returning from which oracle did Oedipus accidentally kill his biological father and his charioteer after a dispute arose?
DELPHI
	B2: After which son of Creon died, did Oedipus manage to defeat the Sphinx and rid Thebes of it? He shares his name with the fiancé of Antigone.
HAEMON

16.	Of the words βασιλεύς, οἶκος, ἵππος, and ὁδός, which is being described in the following sentence: ὁ ἄνηρ ἐστὶν ὃ ἄρχει τῶν πόλεων καὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων. 
βασιλεύς
	B1: Of the same four words from the tossup, which is being described in the following sentence: τὸ ζῷον ἐστιν ὃν τρέχει ἐν τοῖς ἀγροῖς καὶ τῇ μαχῇ.
ἵππος
	B2: Of the same four words from the tossup, which is being described in the following sentence: ὁ τόπος ἐστὶν ἐν ᾧ ἄνδρες καὶ γυναῖκες μένουσιν. 
οἶκος

17.	What lyric poet from Thebes composed poetry from 498 BC to at least 446 BC, and celebrated in verse the individual victors of athletic contests at Panhellenic games in Greece?
PINDAR
	B1: Other than the Olympian, name one of the Panhellenic games Pindar was known to commemorate.
(ONE OF) PYTHIAN, NEMEAN, OR ISTHMIAN GAMES
	B2: Name another.
(ONE OF) PYTHIAN, NEMEAN, OR ISTHMIAN GAMES

18.	What type of pottery was a tall, two-handled vessel used by both the Greeks and Romans for storing wine, olive oil, and other goods?
AMPHORA / AMPHORAI
	B1: Amphorai were often decorated. What style of pottery art consisted of mathematically planned triangles, circles, and other shapes?
GEOMETRIC
	B2: What style, dominant during the Classical period of Greek art, inverted the color scheme of Black-Figure painting?
RED-FIGURE

19.	What name in mythology is shared by a man who was eaten by his horses, a native of Anthedon who fell in love with a young girl named Scylla, and a son of Minos who drowned in a vat of honey and was later found by Polyeidus?
GLAUCUS
	B1: What name in mythology is shared by the first mortal wife of Zeus and the daughter of Tantalus who was turned into a weeping stone on Mt. Sipylus?
NIOBE
	B2: What name in mythology is shared by a daughter of Scamander who married Tros, a daughter of Oceanus who married Chrysaor, and a daughter of Achelous who married Alcmaeon?
CALLIRHOE

20.	After capturing Amphissus and Naupactus, Philip II led 32,000 men to an overwhelming victory over the people rallied for Hellenic liberty at which battle of 338 B.C.?
CHAERONEA
	B1: The success in this battle was attributed to Philip II’s son Alexander overwhelming which famous group under the command of Theagenes?
SACRED BAND OF THEBES
	B2: Which rhetorician had famously described Philip II’s opposition as the “people rallied for Hellenic liberty”? He had earlier spoken against Philip II in a famous series of speeches.
DEMOSTHENES


2020 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 3

1.	For the verb βαίνω, give the 1st person plural present active indicative.
βαίνομεν
	B1: Give the corresponding classical Attic form of the verb ποιέω.
ποιοῦμεν
	B2: Give the corresponding classical Attic form of the verb βοάω.
βοῶμεν

2.	After Alexander the Great subdued the town of Anchialus, what site near Mt. Amanus did he reach at which he routed Darius in 333 B.C.E?
ISSUS
	B1: Prior to the battle of Issus, Alexander had sent which Macedonian general of his to secure the passes from Cilicia into Syria? He would later be assassinated due to his son Philotas having been involved in a conspiracy against the life of Alexander.
PARMENIO(N)
	B2: On his way to Issus, Alexander had gotten stuck at which Phoenician port in Cilicia, causing him to be unable to march to Syria before Darius decided to march to Issus?
MYRIANDROS

3.	What philosopher, general, and historian, whose name means ‘killer of foreigners’, led a force of Greek mercenaries to aid Cyrus the Younger and wrote the Anabasis to describe the journey back from Asia Minor?
XENOPHON
	B1:Which work of Xenophon is considered a supplement to Thucydides and is our fullest account of the history of its period?
HELLENICA
	B2: Which work of Xenophon comes close to being the first novel and contains the first proper love story in Western literature?
CYROP(A)EDIA

4.	From what Greek noun, with what meaning, do we derive “polygamy?”
(ὁ) γάμος - MARRIAGE / WEDDING
	B1: From what Greek verb, with what meaning, do we derive “gramophone” and “stenography?”
γράφω - WRITE
	B2: From what Greek adjective, with what meaning, do we derive “panoply” and “pantomime?”
πᾶς, (πᾶσα, πᾶν) - ALL / EVERY / EACH

5.	Which son of Aeolus was told to have children by his enemy’s daughter Tyro, received the kingdom of Corinth from Medea, married the Pleiad Merope, and eventually became the paternal grandfather of Bellerophon via his son Glaucus?
SISYPHUS
	B1: Sisyphus, after demanding for a spring on the Acrocorinth, informed which river god of the abduction of his daughter Aegina by Zeus?
ASOPUS
	B2: Later on, Sisyphus was buried in a secret grave on the Isthmus of Corinth like which king, who early on in his life had taken refuge with Aphareus and was the father of Pero, the wife of Bias?
NELEUS

6.	What city was ruled by the Agiads and Eurypontids, a formalized diarchy unique among the typical monarchies of ancient Greece, and was renowned for its militaristic culture?
SPARTA
	B1: Which Agiad king, described by Simonides as  ἀρετᾶς μέγαν λελοιπὼς κόσμον ἀέναόν τε κλέος, died in 480 BC leading the Spartans at Thermopylae?
LEONIDAS
	B2: What regent, who shares his name with a geographical author, succeeded Leonidas but was suspected of betraying the Spartans to Xerxes?
PAUSANIAS

7.	Whose shade was said to be a prophet of Bacchus in the silver mines of Thrace, although his death occurred at Troy after Odysseus and Diomedes stole his pristine white horses?
RHESUS
	B1: According to the Iliad, which Thracian king was the father of Rhesus?
EIONEUS
	B2: Besides his beautiful horses, what other thing did Rhesus have that Dolon described as suitable for gods but not mortals?
GOLD ARMOR

8.	Complete the following analogy: λύω : ἔλυσα :: πέμπω : _______?
ἔπεμψα
	B1: Complete the following analogy: λύω : ἔλυσα :: πέμπουσιν : _______?
ἔπεμψαν
	B2: Complete the following analogy: λύω : ἔλυσα :: ποιεῖτε : ______?
ἐποιήσατε

9.	What noun originally meant ‘messenger’, but was repurposed by the Greek New Testament to refer specifically to a divine messenger?
(ὁ) ἄγγελος
	B1: What noun originally meant ‘love’, but was repurposed by the Greek New Testament to refer specifically to divine or brotherly love?
(ἡ) ἀγάπη 
	B2: What adjective originally meant ‘sacred’, but was repurposed by the Greek New Testament to refer specifically to something holy?
ἅγιος, (ἁγία, ἅγιον)

10.	Sometimes called the ‘tenth muse’, what famous poetess wrote a collection of poetry on her love for other women and inspired future poets of both Greek and Latin literature?
(P)SAPPHO
	B1: What island is equally famous in literature for being Sappho’s birthplace?
LESBOS
	B2: It was a common event for Greek lyric poets to be exiled from their home island. On what distant island did Sappho spend part of her life after being exiled from Lesbos?
SICILY

11.	Identify the use of the genitive in this sentence, adapted from the Bibliotheca of Apollodorus: ἡ Μέδουσα μόνη ἦν τῶν Γοργόνων ἣ ἀπέθανεν. 
PARTITIVE GENITIVE
	B1: Now identify the use of the dative in this sentence: ὀδόντες μεγάλοι τῇ Μεδούσῃ ἦσαν, καὶ χεῖρες χαλκαῖ καὶ πτέρυγες χρυσαῖ.
DATIVE OF POSSESSION
	B2: Now identify another use of the genitive in this sentence: ἀποτμηθείσης δὲ τῆς κεφαλῆς, ἀπέφυγε Πήγασος ὁ πτηνὸς ἵππος.
GENITIVE ABSOLUTE

12.	The rebuilding of a wall in Thrace to repel the prince Teres, the implementation of kleruchies, the finishing of the Parthenon, and the delivering of a famed funeral oration all took place under which Athenian statesman’s guidance?
PERICLES
	B1: The death of which antagonist of Cimon more or less cleared the way for Pericles’ ascension to the head of Athens?
EPHIALTES
	B2: While besieging what island did Pericles leave to fend off Phoenician ships? He eventually came back and then recited his aforementioned funeral oration for those who had died during the siege of this island.
SAMOS

13.	Which Athenian tragedy contained the following events: after the failed attack of the Seven against Thebes, Creon forbids the burial of Polynices, and the titular protagonist buries him anyway and is imprisoned as a punishment?
ANTIGONE / Ἀντιγόνη
	B1: Who was the author of this play?
SOPHOCLES
	B2: Which play concerning the Theban cycle tells a story of the blind Oedipus fleeing to a town near Athens, where Theseus grants him sanctuary?
OEDIPUS AT COLONUS / Οἰδίπους ἐπὶ Κολωνῷ

14.	 Differentiate in meaning between the adjectives ἄξιος and αἴτιος.
WORTHY and CULPABLE / RESPONSIBLE
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between the preposition διά and the adjective δῖος.
ON ACCOUNT OF/THROUGH and DIVINE
	B2: Differentiate in meaning between νέος and ναῦς.
NEW / RECENT / YOUNG (MAN) and SHIP / BOAT

15.	Who killed Castor with a spear when fighting over the Leucippidae, and is more often known for having carried off Evenus’ daughter Marpessa in a winged chariot?
IDAS
	B1: When Idas had carried off Marpessa, Evenus was unable to catch up and threw himself into which river that was renamed the Evenus?
LYCORMAS
	B2: Who is said to have given this winged chariot to Idas?
POSEIDON

16.	The nouns χείρ, γένος, Παρθενών, and οὐδείς are all what declension?
THIRD
	B1: The nouns πολίτης, στρατιώτης and νεανίας are all what declension?
FIRST 
	B2: The nouns ὄνομα, πρᾶγμα, and αἴνιγμα are all what declension?
THIRD

17.	What poet, one of the earliest Greek authors other than Homer, grew up as a shepherd in Ascra near Mt. Helicon, when he claims the muses visited him to encourage him to write didactic poetry?
HESIOD
	B1: What didactic poem of Hesiod taught readers the origins of the gods?
THEOGONY
	B2: What other didactic poem of Hesiod taught the practice of agriculture and the value of honest work?
WORKS AND DAYS

18.	What Peloponnesian city, north of Tiryns, was once ruled by Lycurgus, and found itself laid waste to by a monstrous offspring of Echidna that had been nursed by Hera herself?
NEMEA
	B1: What infant son of Lycurgus was killed by a snake while lying on a bed of parsley, to the horror of his nurse Hypsipyle?
OPHELTES
	B2: Hypsipyle had previously been the queen of Lemnos, but was either exiled or sold into slavery for saving her father. Who was this king, the son of Dionysus and Ariadne?
THOAS

19.	What religious organization came into conflict with the city of Krisa when it began taxing travelers wishing to visit the Oracle of Delphi, culminating in the first Sacred War beginning in 595 B.C.?
THE AMPHICTYONIC LEAGUE
	B1: What games were reorganized following the end of the First Sacred War on the site of Krisa?
PYTHIAN GAMES
	B2: Who was said to have won the first chariot race at the recently organized Pythian games? 
CLEISTHENES

20.	What type of archaic statue is defined by young men carved into stiff postures with one foot forward, always appearing in the nude?
KOUROS
	B1: What type of archaic statue was nearly the same as the kouros with two key differences: first that they were women, second that they were always clothed?
KORE
	B2: The kouros and the kore fell out of favor due to the invention of what art style, where the statue was looking to the side and shifting its weight to one leg?
CONTRAPPOSTO

2020 NJCL Ἀγών
 SEMIFINAL ROUND

				
1.	Complete the following analogy: πόλις : πόλεως :: τίς : ______
τίνος
	B1: Complete the following analogy: πόλις : ἐν τῇ πόλει :: Ἀθῆναι  : _____
Ἀθήνησι /  ἐν ταῖς Ἀθήναις
B2: Complete the following analogy: ἐν τῇ πόλει : ἀπὸ τῆς πόλεως :: ποῦ : _____
πόθεν

2.	Who, besides having convinced Artaphernes of Sardis to send 200 ships to take down Naxos alongside Megabates, is more well known for being the instigator of the revolt of the Ionian Greeks against Persia?
ARISTAGORAS
	B1: After defeating the Ionians at the battle of Lade in 494 B.C., the Persians laid siege to which city in western Anatolia? This city was again sieged in 334 B.C. but at that time by Alexander the Great.
MILETUS
	B2: Which famous temple of Apollo was surrendered by the Branchidae, priests of the temple, after this siege and was actually burnt down, contrary to Darius’ usual reverence of oracular gods?
APOLLO at DIDYMA

3.	What daimones were killed by Zeus for stealing the infant Epaphus at Hera's request, even though they had protected the god as a baby on Crete?
CURETES
	B1: According to Hesiod, what woodland spirits, who were often represented with horses' tails, pointed ears, and small horns, were said to be the offspring of the daughters of Hecaterus along with the Curetes and mountain-nymphs?
SATYRS
	B2: What other companions of Dionysus were considered older and wiser versions of satyrs, and were believed to have musical skill and prophetic abilities– perhaps the reason that King Midas captured one in Phrygia?
S(E)ILENI

4.	What nephew of Panyasis that helped colonize Thurii in Italy, deemed both the Greeks burning their dead and the Indians eating them morally right, and is well known for his ludicrously incorrect numbers as he numbered the Persians to be about 2 million at the battle of Thermopylae?
HERODOTUS
	B1: What group of mythological figures is said to have possibly given their names to the titles of each of the books in his Histories?
MUSES
	B2: Which famous fictitious Egyptian pharaoh in Herodotus’ Histories succeeded Proteus, had a treasury of his stolen from by the sons of the architect he commissioned, put his daughter in a royal brothel to try getting men to confess to her if they had done the crime, and eventually married his daughter to the thief after he revealed himself?
RHAMPSINITUS

5.	What use of the genitive is found in the following sentence: ὁ ἄνηρ ὑπὸ τοῦ υἱοῦ ἀπέθανεν.
AGENT
	B1: What use of the genitive is found in the following sentence: τῆς πρώτης ἡμέρας ὁπλίτας ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ τάξομεν.
TIME WITHIN WHICH
	B2: What use of the dative is found in the following sentence: εἰ τοῖς θεοῖς θύσαιτε, δῶρα πέμψαιεν ἄν.
REFERENCE/INDIRECT OBJECT/ADVANTAGE

6.	What hero exiled Odysseus for the murders of Penelope's suitors, and travelled to Epeirus, Phthia, and Sparta after returning unscathed from the Trojan War, thanks to the help of his grandmother, Thetis?
NEOPTOLEMUS
	B1: What woman bore three sons to Neoptolemus– Pielus, Pergamus, and Molossus– whom Peleus protected when Neoptolemus' wife grew jealous?
ANDROMACHE
	B2: Supposedly buried on the spot where he died in the temple precinct of Delphi, the cause of Neoptolemus' death is disputed. According to one variant, whose rumors caused an angry mob to kill the hero, all so that Hermione would no longer be married?
ORESTES

7.	Where, on a battlefield near Thebes, did the Spartan king Cleombrotus die in 371 B.C.? 
LEUCTRA
B1: Who led the Thebans to victory in this battle?		
        EPAMINONDAS
	B2: What tyrant of Pherae hurried to Thebes days after the battle and forced the Spartans to withdraw from Boeotia?
JASON




8.	Differentiate in meaning between τέκνον and τέχνη.
CHILD, ART/SKILL/CRAFT
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between ῥήτωρ and ῥῆμα.

SPEAKER, WORD/VERB
	B2: Differentiate in meaning between ἤδη and ἡδύς.
ALREADY, SWEET

9.	What sardonic, vindictive poet was so jilted about the cancellation of his marriage that he drove his would-be bride and would-be father-in-law to suicide through poetry?
ARCHILOCHUS
	B1: Name either the would-be bride or the would-be father-in-law Archilochus names in his poetry?
NEOBULE (BRIDE) OR LYKBAMES (FATHER-IN-LAW)
	B2: Archilochus’ tone was so scathing that he is said to have given what metrical foot a connotation of vulgarity?
IAMB

10.	Who was accused of having taken bribes from Alexander of Macedon after the conquest of Thasos, led 4000 hoplites to Messenia to help Sparta, and was a son of Miltiades who was ostracized in 461 B.C.?
CIMON
	B1: What natural disaster took place in Sparta in 464 B.C., enabling their subjugated people to escape and leading to Cimon going to Messenia to help them?
AN EARTHQUAKE
	B2: In which city that was on a steep hill, did the subjugated people of Sparta find shelter and safety after their initial revolt? The difficulty to besiege such a city is why Sparta had to call out to many allies to come help them.
ITHOME

11.	From what Greek verb, with what meaning, do we derive “ink,” “calm,” and “caustic?”
καίω - BURN / KINDLE
	B1: From what Greek verb do we derive “kaleidoscope?’
ὁράω/εἶδον / σκοπέω  - SEE
	B2: From what Greek verb do we derive “blame?”
φήμι - SPEAK

12.	Who, said to have been worshipped on Cyprus in a grove sacred to Aphrodite, was sometimes said to have been killed by Artemis after Dionysus said something about her to Artemis, and is famous for being the mother of Phanus, Staphylus, and Oenopion?
ARIADNE
	B1: What constellation was said to have represented a gift that either Theseus or Dionysus gave to her?
CORONA BOREALIS
	B2: If not Cyprus or Naxos, what Greek city in the Peloponnese was said to have been the site of her tomb?
ARGOS


13.	Completed at the start of the Classical Period circa 460-450 B.C. featuring an athletic youth, what bronze-cast statue embodies the ideal of ῥύθμος in its depiction of the same activity which led to the death of Hyacinthus in mythology?
THE DISCOBOLUS
	B1: Who, born in Eleutherae on the borders of Boeotia and Attica, sculpted the original discobolus, which is now lost to time?
MYRON
	B2: What other statue, known for the troubles of its active pose, was said to have been another bronze-cast statue built at the same time as the Discobolus and was found from the sea of an eponymous coast?
ZEUS/POSEIDON of ARTEMISIUM

14.	What literary device, excluding all forms of alliteration, can be found in this choral ode from Aristophanes’ Frogs: βρεκεκεκὲξ κοὰξ κοάξ, βρεκεκεκὲξ κοὰξ κοάξ. λιμναῖα κρηνῶν τέκνα, ξύναυλον ὕμνων βοὰν φθεγξώμεθ᾽, εὔγηρυν ἐμὰν ἀοιδάν?
ONOMATOPOEIA
	B1: What literary device, excluding all forms of alliteration, can be found in the following: ἀποθάνοιμεν καὶ τοῖς πολεμίοις μαχεσαίμεθα.
HYSTERON PROTERON
	B2: What literary device, excluding all forms of alliteration, can be found in the following elegaic couplet from Tyrtaeus: καὶ πόδα πὰρ ποδὶ θεὶς καὶ ἐπ’ ἀσπίδος ἀσπίδ’ ἐρείσας / ἐν δὲ λόφον τε λόφῳ και κυνέην κυνέῃ?
POLYPTOTON

15.	What adverb in Greek is used to introduce consecutive or result clauses?
ὥστε/ὡς
	B1: What mood will the subordinate verb of a result clause be in if the result is a consequence of intention, tendency, or capacity such that the result occurs not as fact but as would be expected?
INFINITIVE
	B2: What mood will the subordinate verb of a result clause be in if the result is a matter of fact?
INDICATIVE

16.	Which general, instrumental in preserving Athenian democracy, was first elected as the leader of the democratic sailors at Samos in response to the Athenian coup of 411 B.C., then fought off the Thirty Tyrants in 403 B.C.? 
THRASYBULUS
	B1: Which Athenian general, following a defeat in the Peloponnesian War, later teamed up with the Persian Pharnabazus to defeat the Spartans at Cnidos?
CONON
	B2: Which Athenian general was a member of both the coup of 411 and the Thirty Tyrants before butting heads with his more extreme colleagues? He was also a commander at Arginusae and managed not to get himself executed for that disaster, but he did end up killed for his resistance to the Thirty Tyrants.
THERAMENES

17.	In what speech of Lysias does a man defend himself against the charge of premeditated murder against a “forceful lover” who had been allegedly corrupting his wife?
ON THE MURDER OF ERATOSTHENES
	B1: What was the name of the defendant in this trial who had supposedly killed Eratosthenes in cold blood?
EUPHILETOS / Εὐφίλητος
	B2: Give one reason Euphiletos cited as evidence for his lack of preparation in killing Eratosthenes.
UNJUST PENALTIES / ADULTERERS ARE TOO LIGHTLY PUNISHED UNDER THE LAW //
THE PRESENCE OF (NUMEROUS) WITNESSES //
HE DID NOT TRY TO CRAFT AN ALIBI (WITH HIS FRIEND SOSTRATUS)

18.	Listen carefully to the following passage adapted from Aesop’s fables, which I will read twice, then answer the questions that follow in ENGLISH:

	Ἄνθρωπός τις ἐκάλει ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ ξένους, ὁ δὲ τούτου κύων ἄλλον κύνα ἐκάλει, λέγων· Εὖ δειπνήσεις, ὦ φίλε, παρ’ ἐμοί. ὁ δ’ ἄλλος εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν σπεύσας καὶ ἰδὼν τὸ καλὸν δεῖπνον, εἶπεν· Βαβαί, πολλαὶ χαραί μοι ἔσονται ἐν ταύτῃ τῇ νυκτί. χαίρων οὖν καὶ σείων τὴν κέρκον, χάριν ἐδήλωσε πρὸς τὸν φίλον τὸν κεκληκότα ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον.

	How did the second dog feel upon seeing the dinner?
HAPPY / ELATED vel sim.
	B1: Where did the dog hurry to?
THE HOUSE
	B2: Translate the final phrase of the passage, “τὸν φίλον τὸν κεκληκότα ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον”, into English.
THE FRIEND/DEAR ONE WHO CALLED/HAVING CALLED (THE DOG/HIM) TO THE DINNER
vel sim. 

19.	Let’s take a deep-dive into the royal house of Ithaca’s messy family tree. Laertes' grandmother attracted many men in her youth and received gifts from each of them, including a golden crown from Pteleon, before settling down with her husband. Who was this beauty, who was unfortunately killed by her husband with Minos’ gift, an infallible javelin?
PROCRIS
	B1: Laertes' father, Arceisius, is usually said to be the son of Cephalus and Procris, making them Odysseus' great-grandparents. However, Arceisius is sometimes said to be a son of which god, the father of Odysseus’ other immortal great-grandfather?
ZEUS
	B2: Finally, let's look at the generation after the Trojan War. What two mother-son pairs married each other, supposedly so inclined because the two sons looked so much like their father?
PENELOPE KAI TELEMACHUS M. TELEGONUS KAI CIRCE

20.	Complete the following analogy εἷς : πρῶτος :: δύο : _____.
δεύτερος
	B1: Complete the following analogy δύο : δεύτερος :: ἑπτά : _____.
ἕβδομος
	B2: Complete the following analogy ἑπτά : ἕβδομος :: ὀκτώ : _____.
ὄγδοος

2020 NJCL Ἀγών
 FINAL ROUND 

1.	Which of the following, if any, does not derive from the same Greek root as the others: psychrophobia, psychic, psychedelic, psyop?
   PSYCHROPHOBIA
B1: From what first declension noun do the words psychic and psyop derive?
ψυχή (SOUL)
B2: From what adjective does the word psychrophobia derive?
ψυχρός (COLD)

2.	Alexander the Great set up Craterus to defend his camp before leading Scythian archers and Macedonian cavalry to overcome the Indian king Porus at what battle in 326 B.C. that gave him control of the Hyphasis lands?
HYDASPES
	B1: After the battle of Hydaspes, Alexander the Great founded two cities in the local area. One of them was named after which horse of his?
BUCEPHALUS
	B2: Which man of Cashmir was said to have sent embassies to Alexander the Great before and after the battle of the Hydaspes and subsequently had his power expanded by Alexander the Great?
ABISARES

3.	Translate the following sentence from Greek to English: ἐκεῖνοι οἱ αὐτοὶ δεσπόται ὑφ’ ἡμῶν καὶ ἐφιλοῦντο καὶ ἐτιμῶντο.
THOSE SAME DESPOTS WERE BOTH LOVED AND HONORED BY US
vel sim.
	B1: Translate this sentence from Greek to English: ὑμῖν ἐρῶ τὴν δήλην ἀλήθειαν· τοὺς μὲν οἱ θεοὶ ὠφελοῦσι, τοὺς δ’ οὔ.
I WILL TELL YOU (ALL) THE CLEAR TRUTH: THE GODS 
HELP SOME (PEOPLE) AND DON’T (HELP) OTHERS
	B2: Translate this sentence from Greek to English: ἐπὶ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις τούτοις οὐ γελῶμεν, ἐπεὶ αὐτοὺς τιμῶμεν.
WE DON’T LAUGH AT THESE PHILOSOPHERS, SINCE WE HONOR THEM.




4.	Treatises on the causes of disease, epidemics, humoral theory, and an eponymous oath are all attributed to what inhabitant of Cos?
HIPPOCRATES
	B1: Over 700 years later, what later author, who served as the personal physician to a number of emperors in the second century AD, contributed greatly to the Hippocratic understanding of pathology by writing treatises not only on the ailments of the body but also ailments of the mind in what could be described as the beginnings of psychotherapy? He may be more recognizable from the fact that he would perform vivisections on monkeys and pigs as a sort of medical spectacle.
 (AELIUS / CLAUDIUS) GALEN(US)
	B2: Both Hippocrates and Galen promoted the theory that the body was comprised of four “humors.” An imbalance with one or more of one’s humors was the origin of disease within the individual. What are the four humors?
BLOOD / αἷμα, PHLEGM / φλέγμα, 
BLACK BILE / μέλαινα χολή, YELLOW BILE / ξανθὴ χολή

5.	According to Apollonius of Rhodes, who was assisted by king Nausithoüs in establishing a colony on the northeastern Adriatic coast and is much more famous in a different version of his story for becoming the father of Cleodaeus by Iole? 
HYLLUS
	B1: Following Apollonius' variant, Hyllus was actually a son of Heracles and what nymph on Scheria?
MELITE
	B2: King Nausithoüs of Scheria was actually said to have been the grandson of what giant, often called their leader, through his mother Periboea?
EURYMEDON

6.	Which of the following nouns, if any, is not the same gender as the others: σπέρμα, κῆρυξ, ἔτος, ἔργον?
κῆρυξ
	B1: Which of the following nouns, if any, is not the same gender as the others: εἰκών, βοή, ἅμαξα, βίβλος?
THEY ALL BELONG
	B2: Which of the following nouns, if any, is not the same gender as the others: πόνος, συφεός, τεῖχος, χρόνος.
τεῖχος

7.	In mythology, what type of object depicted Perseus flying with the head of Medusa in a silver bag, featured the contrasting image of a city at peace and a city at war, and was made by Athena with the skin of the giant Pallas?
SHIELD
	B1: In mythology, what type of object almost killed Amphiaraüs before he was swallowed up by the earth and was banged on the shields of the Corybantes?
SPEAR
	B2: In mythology, what type of object made of adamant was given to Hera and was snatched away from Aphrodite while she bathed in the Acheloüs?
SANDAL

8.	The Wingspread Convention is a standard proposed by Emmett Bennett to improve the work of Michael Ventris and John Chadwick, who led the work in deciphering what Mycenaean script, which Linear A preceded?
LINEAR B
	B1: Carl Blegen discovered a cache of Linear B tablets near what city, near which the Griffin Warrior Tomb—also called the tomb of Nestor—is located?
	PYLOS
	B2: Luigi Pernier discovered what artifact, which contains an undeciphered script, in a Minoan palace on Crete?
												        PHAISTOS DISC

9.	Σαμία, Περινθία, Ἑαυτὸν Τιμωρούμενος, and Εὐνοῦχος all served as inspiration to the second century BC playwright Terence. What writer of New Comedy authored all of these inspiring works?
MENANDER
	B1: The Mostellaria of Plautus took inspiration from the comedian Diphilus who also wrote a play centered around a specter. What is the name of this Greek play which simply means “Specter?”
Φάσμα
	B2: Another of Plautus’ plays, the Miles Gloriosus, is centered around the soldier Pyrgopolyneices. This play is based off of a Greek original from Menander by the name of Ἀλαζών. What does the noun Ἀλαζών, which could be used to describe Pyrgopolyneices, mean?
BRAGGART / WANDERER / CHARLATAN / QUACK (re: sophists and doctors)

10.	This question will be visual in nature. You will have 10 seconds to examine the image once it has been shared. [share the visual] Your question: You are looking at a map of the Athenian acropolis with several structures left unnamed. Identify by name and letter the structure on the acropolis which was created in the fifth century BC for the safety of spectators after wooden bleachers in the Agora collapsed, maintained its functionality through the Roman period, and housed a cult statue to Dionysus in an adjoining temenos. 
F - THEATER OF DIONYSUS
	B1: Give the letter and identify the tetrastyle structure of Pentelic marble designed by Kallikrates which was destroyed in 480 BC by the Persians, reconstructed by 420 BC and used until the fourth century AD when it would have been closed by the Romans and its winged cult statue abandoned. 
B - TEMPLE OF ATHENA NIKE
	B2: Give the letter and identify the Hellenistic structure donated by a king of Pergamum around 160 BC. Vitruvius cites this structure as something to be erected as refuge for spectators of dramatic productions during inclement weather or perhaps as a store for theater props.
D - STOA (OF EUMENES)

11.	τί Ἀγγλιστὶ σημαίνει “γάλα;”
MILK
	B1: τί Ἀγγλιστὶ σημαίνει “δάκτυλος;”
FINGER
	B2: τί Ἀγγλιστὶ σημαίνει “ἐλέγχω;”
CROSS-EXAMINE / DISGRACE / PUT TO SHAME / REFUTE

12.	The combined efforts of the Athenians, Spartans, and Ionians under Xanthippus and Leotychidas saw them overcome the retreating Persians at what battle of 479 B.C. shortly after Plataea?
MYCALE
	B1: The Persians at both Plataea and Mycale lost generals. Which famous general of theirs did the Persians lose at Plataea?
MARDONIUS
	B2: After the battle of Mycale, Xanthippus led Athenians and Ionians to besiege which fortress on the Hellespont that was unable to last the winter and fell to them?
SESTOS

13.	What ancient god, whose name eventually referred to a type of hymn or anthem, was conflated with Thanatos, Apollo, and Asclepius, and is known solely for his healing of Hades in Hesiod and Ares in the Illiad?
PAEEON/PAEAN
	B1: According to Homer, all inhabitants of Egypt were skilled in the art of medicine, as they were descended from Paeeon. What Egyptian woman taught her skills to Helen, even giving her a drug that calmed Telemachus' tears in Book IV of the Odyssey?
POLYDAMNA
	B2: What herb, possibly the modern snowdrop or a type of rue, was too dangerous for mortals to harvest, but, for immortals like Hermes, perfectly safe?
MOLY

14.	What lyric poet, who once feuded with the nobleman Scopas over payment for a poem, composed an epigram for the Spartan dead at Thermopylae and hailed from the island of Ceos?
SIMONIDES (OF CEOS)
B1: Which of the nine lyric poets, who wrote primarily about old age, hailed from the island of Teos?
ANACREON (OF TEOS)
B2: Which of the nine lyric poets wrote a poem, Geryoneis, that the modern poet Anne Carson adapted into her verse novel Autobiography of Red?
STESICHORUS (OF METAUROS)

15.	Using one word, say in Greek “while educating.”
παιδεύων / παιδεύουσα / παιδεῦον
	B1: Using one word, say in Greek “having abandoned.”
λιπών / λιποῦσα / λιπόν / λελοιπώς / λελοιπυῖα / λελοιπός
	B2: Using one word, say in Greek “having been educated.”
πεπαιδευμένος / πεπαιδευμένη / πεπαιδευμένον / παιδευθείς / παιδευθεῖσα / παιδευθέν

16.	Etymologically speaking, an anthomancer divines auspices from what medium?
FLOWER(S)
	B1: Etymologically speaking, an ailuromancer divines auspices from what medium?
CAT(S)
	B2: Etymologically speaking, the practice of halomancy divines auspices from what medium?
SALT / SEA / BRINE

17.	The colonizers of Heracleia were ordered to build their city around an olive tree and to honor which Argonaut, sometimes said to have been a son of Abas, as their protector, possibly because he had effectively sacrificed himself by joining the expedition while knowing that he would die?
IDMON
	B1: Which Argonaut, a son of Clytoneus, was an expert seaman who offered to take the helm of the Argo after Tiphys?
NAUPLIUS
	B2: Which two Argonauts were killed by Caphaurus in Libya when they tried to steal his sheep?
CANTHUS and ERIBOTES

18.	Listen carefully to the following passage adapted from Demosthenes’ περὶ τοῦ στεφάνου, which I will read twice, then answer the questions that follow in ENGLISH:

	καὶ ἀπήγγειλαν οἱ πρυτάνεις τὰ προσηγγελμένα ἑαυτοῖς. ἠρώτα μὲν ὁ κῆρυξ, Τίς ἀγορεύειν βούλεται; ἀνίστατο δ’ οὐδείς. πολλάκις δὲ τοῦ κήρυκος ἐρωτῶντος, ἀνίστατο οὐδείς, πάντων μὲν τῶν στρατηγῶν παρόντων, πάντων δὲ τῶν ῥητόρων, καλούσης δὲ τῆς κοινῆς τῆς πατρίδος φωνῆς τὸν ἐροῦντα ὑπὲρ σωτηρίας· ἡ γὰρ φωνὴ τοῦ κήρυκος νομίζεται εἶναι φωνὴ κοινὴ τῆς πατρίδος.

	Upon hearing the herald’s question, who stood to declaim?
NOBODY
	B1: Much to Demosthenes’ chagrin, whom does he list as sitting around rather than standing to declaim?
ALL OF THE GENERALS and ALL OF THE SPEAKERS
	B2: According to the passage, what was the country demanding from the herald?
A SAVIOR / SAVIORS / SALVATION

19.	What branch of philosophy is explored in τὰ εἰς ἑαυτόν, a collection of notes written in κοίνη Greek in the second century A.D. by an emperor of Rome who used the work to espouse a path to εὐδαιμονία by keeping oneself from being swayed by pleasure, fear, or pain?
STOICISM
	B1: Which Roman emperor penned the collection before he died of plague in 180 A.D.?
MARCUS AURELIUS
	B2: What earlier Stoic, who had his floruit in the early 2nd-century A.D., had his teachings published by his student Arrian in the Discourses?
EPICTETUS

20.	What city was the source of an Aegean-wide system of weights and measures invented by its tyrant Pheidon and was the place where a king of Epirus died when an old woman threw a roof tile on his head? 
ARGOS
	B1: At which battle in 669 B.C. did Pheidon lead Argos to defeat the Spartans?
HYSIAE
	B2: Which games, originally presided over by the Eleians, did Pheidon make Pan-Hellenic? 
OLYMPIC GAMES






Replacement myth read on round 3, tossup 18, B2 in room 6:
What hero, who found the body of Opheltes, interceded for Hypsipyle and founded the Nemean games in the boy’s honor?
ADRASTUS
VISUAL

