2024 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 1

1.	For the phrase ὁ λόγος, give the accusative singular.
τὸν λόγον
	B1: Now make the phrase τὸν λόγον dative plural.
τοῖς λόγοις

2.	Who was responsible for the ostracism of Megacles, Xanthippus, and Aristides, but is perhaps most famous for interpreting an oracle to build the Athenian navy during the Persian War?
THEMISTOCLES
	B1: At what battle of 480 B.C. did the Athenian navy defeat Xerxes and the Persians and turn the tides of the war?
(BATTLE OF) SALAMIS

3.	What work in dactylic hexameter details the trials of Typhon and the Titanomachy, the castration of Uranus, and the births of the gods from the beginning of the universe?  
THEOGONY
B1: The end of the Theogony also serves to introduce what other work of Hesiod — now lost — which described mortal family trees by focusing on the various women in mythology?
CATALOGUES OF WOMEN / ĒHOEAE

4.	What Greek verb lies at the root of “pedant,” “strategy,” and “demagogue,” the last of which is a sort of political leader?
ἄγω
	B1: “Demagogue” is also fittingly derived from what Greek noun, since these political leaders in ancient times would champion the cause of the common folk?
δῆμος

5.	The “Teucrians” is a referent used for the people of what city, which was sacked once by Heracles due to the lack of payment by Laomedon and a second time by a thousand Greek ships led by Agamemnon?
TROY
B1: Heracles had demanded payment for saving what daughter of Laomedon, who used her veil to ransom her brother Priam?
HESIONE
         
6.	Differentiate in meaning between the antonyms παλαιός and νέος respectively.
OLD & {NEW / YOUNG}
	B1: Differentiate in meaning between the antonyms χαλεπός and ῥᾴδιος respectively.
{DIFFICULT / HARD} & EASY

7.	Omens such as the temple of Artemis at Ephesus burning down and lightning striking the womb of Olympias were all associated with the birth of what legendary Macedonian ruler?
ALEXANDER THE GREAT
	B1: What object did Alexander the Great famously cut in Phrygia, allegedly making him destined to rule all of Asia?
GORDIAN KNOT

8.	Who claimed that the most beautiful thing is whatever one loves in Poem 16, lamented watching a love interest sitting opposite a man in Poem 31, and invoked Aphrodite in Poem 1 of her fragmentary corpus?
SAPPHO
B1: Sappho hailed from what island?
LESBOS

9.	What use of the genitive case appears in the sentence τῶν στρατιωτῶν οὐδεὶς ἤθελε μάχεσθαι as well as the phrase ὁ ἄριστος ἀνθρώπων, which means “the best of men”?
PARTITIVE (GENITIVE)
	B1: Give the use of the dative case that can be found in the following sentence: οἱ στρατιῶται τοὺς πολεμίους λίθοις ἔβαλλον.
MEANS / INSTRUMENT

10.	Who took refuge at Camicus in Cocalus’s court and gave himself away when he passed a thread through a shell with an ant, reminiscent of his solution that he developed for Theseus to escape his labyrinth? 
DAEDALUS
B1: Daedalus had originally ended up on Crete because he had committed what crime?
KILLED (HIS NEPHEW) PERDIX [IF JUST “MURDER”, PROMPT WITH “WHO DID HE KILL?”]

11.	Relations between what two cities were inflamed by Brasidas and Cleon — who both died at the Battle of Amphipolis — leading to battles under generals like Alcibiades as the Peloponnesian War continued?
ATHENS and SPARTA
	B1: What peace ended the first decade of the Peloponnesian War in 421 B.C.?
PEACE OF NICIAS

12.	Who was depicted in a statue possibly modeled on Phryne by Praxiteles displayed at Knidos, as well as an armless Melian statue, whose modern name ends in “de Milo”? 
APHRODITE [ACCEPT VENUS]
	B1: What goddess is depicted in another famous Hellenistic work from Samothrace displayed at the Louvre, where she stands on the prow of a stone boat?
NIKE / (WINGED) VICTORY (OF SAMOTHRACE)

13.	Note to players: there will be an extra clue after one reading of the sentence. Using the adjective ἀκαδήμικος for “academic,” translate from English into Greek: “I am an academic weapon.” The extra clue: the word for weapon is ὅπλον.
ὅπλον ἀκαδήμικόν εἰμι [players do not need to know accents; accept εἰμί at beginning of sentence]
	B1: Now translate into Greek: “We are academic weapons.”
ὅπλα ἀκαδήμικά ἐσμεν
	
14.	What title — which, like Symposium, was used by both Plato and Xenophon — is given to two works that recount the trial speech of the doomed philosopher Socrates?
APOLOGY / APOLOGIA
B1: How exactly was Socrates condemned to die?
DRINKING {POISON / HEMLOCK}
	
15.	Who spent a night at Cleonae with the laborer Molorcus and drank wine with the centaur Pholus while on his way to respectively kill an invulnerable beast and catch a golden-horned deer for Eurystheus?
HERACLES
B1: Heracles later returned to Cleonae to kill what two twins, described in some sources as Siamese twins? You can give either their individual names or their collective name.
MOLIONES / MOLIONIDAE // CTEATUS and EURYTUS

2024 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 2

1.	The treachery of Ephialtes enabled a force known as the Immortals to crash down on the few Spartans daring to hold which pass as part of what they knew would be a suicide mission?
THERMOPYLAE
	B1: Which Spartan king personally led this Alamo-esque last stand?
LEONIDAS

2.	Differentiate in meaning between βαίνω and βάλλω.
(TO) {WALK / GO} and (TO) {THROW / HIT}
	B1: Give the meaning of βλέπω, which is synonymous with the Greek verb at the root of “diorama.”  
(TO) {SEE / LOOK}

3.	In what region were the cities of Myus, Priene, Colophon, Ephesus, Halicarnassus, and Miletus?
ASIA MINOR [ACCEPT “IONIA”, BUT DO NOT READ UNLESS GIVEN]
B1: Besides all being in Asia Minor, the cities listed in the tossup all lay within what coastal region? This region gives its name to an early 5th century revolt against Persian rule. 
IONIA

4.	Distinguish in name between a boy named “young warrior” who was critical to the sack of Troy and a boy named “lord of the city” who was flung from the walls of Troy to end Hector’s line.
{NEOPTOLEMUS / PYRRHUS} and ASTYANAX
	B1: Oddly enough, Neoptolemus took what woman as his concubine?
ANDROMACHE

5.	Who innovated with a 15-member chorus and a third actor in works such as Philoctetes, Ajax, and a quasi-trilogy involving Antigone and two Oedipus plays?
SOPHOCLES
B1: In the Greek theater, audiences would watch a long show consisting of three tragedies and one play of what genre, featuring comic elements within a topic fit for tragedy and named after a type of mythological creature?
SATYR PLAY
         
6.	Ἑλληνιστὶ λέγε· τί ἐστι δύο καὶ τέτταρα;
ἕξ
	B1: Ἑλληνιστὶ λέγε· τί ἐστιν ἓξ καὶ τρία;
ἐννέα

7.	What author’s famous passages include the Melian Dialogue, criticism of “mythological” historiography, and the funeral oration of Pericles, all part of his History of the Peloponnesian War?
THUCYDIDES
B1: Thucydides was removed from his generalship after failing to retake what city?
AMPHIPOLIS

8.	Blood was metaphorically the ink used by what man when he decreed that even petty thievery was punishable by death, writing a notoriously harsh Athenian law code?
DRACO
B1: Which legendary figure is said to have composed the laws of Sparta?
LYCURGUS

9.	What sort of monsters, three of which were killed by Apoll o to avenge Asclepius, didn’t realize their neighbor had been outwitted when he cried that he had been wounded by οὖτις, the clever Odysseus?
CYCLOPES
	B1: One of the people Asclepius might have revived is what son of Hipponous and Astynome who declared not even Zeus could stop him from taking Thebes after scaling the wall?
CAPANEUS

10.	For the Greek verb μένω, give the 2nd person singular present active imperative form, such that it means “Stay!”
μένε
B1: For the same verb, give the present active infinitive, such that it means “to remain.”
μένειν

11.	According to a Homeric Hymn, who put his swaddling-clothes back on after creating brushwood sandals, turning a tortoise shell into a lyre, and dragging cattle backwards in the hopes of fooling Apollo?
HERMES
	B1: According to another Homeric Hymn, what god was the son of “the rich-tressed daughter of Dryops” — whom some scholars believe might have been named Penelope in a lost tradition?
PAN

12.	What genre saw works titled On the Crown, On the Murder of Eratosthenes, and Philippics penned by the likes of Lysias and Demosthenes for delivery in the Athenian Assembly or law courts?
ORATORY / RHETORIC / SPEECHES
	B1: On the Crown was Demosthenes’s rebuttal against what rival orator, whose speech Against Ctesiphon had tried to deny Demosthenes the honor of a crown?
AESCHINES

13.	What Greek word lies at the root of the following words? A shape with one set of parallel sides, “trapezoid”; an eight limbed mollusc, “octopus”; and a three-legged stand for a camera, “tripod.”
πούς (= FOOT)
	B1: What other derivative of πούς is a long bench placed in rows to seat the congregation at a church?
PEW
	
14.	What position was held by a man who was killed by Harmodius and Aristogeiton — Hipparchus — as well as by his father Peisistratus, who had used popular support to seize dictatorial power in Athens?
TYRANT (OF ATHENS)
B1: What brother of Hipparchus continued to rule as a tyrant until he was forced into exile and sought refuge at the Persian court?
HIPPIAS
	
15.	Note to moderator: make sure players have tiny slips of paper. When recognized by the spotter, please perform the following command: γράφε Ἑλληνιστὶ ἐν τῇ παπύρῳ· χαῖρε.
PLAYER SUCCESSFULLY WRITES χαῖρε ON PAPER [with or without accent]
B1: Now perform this command: τρέπου εἰς ἑταῖρον καὶ τέμνε τὴν πάπυρον αὐτοῦ.
PLAYER TURNS TO A TEAMMATE AND CUTS/TEARS THEIR PAPER

2024 NJCL Ἀγών
SEMIFINAL ROUND
	
1.	Addressees including famous athletes and rulers like Hieron of Syracuse commissioned poems from what Theban author, who commemorated figures at the Olympian, Nemean, Pythian, and Isthmian games?
PINDAR
	B1: Some of these addressees also commissioned victory odes from what other author, a nephew of Simonides judged by later critics to be decidedly inferior in poetic genius?
BACCHYLIDES

2.	Said to have been conceived when their mother poured water into her lap, what pair of brothers killed each other attempting to capture Artemis and famously used Ossa and Pelion to attack Olympus?
OTUS and EPHIALTES // ALOADAE
	B1: On what island did Otus and Ephialtes kill each other? This is the same island that saw Dionysus find his mortal wife.
NAXOS / DIA / STRONGYLE

3.	Which of the following English words is not derived from the same Greek verb as the others: aesthetic, prosthetic, synthetic, antithetical?
AESTHETIC
B1: Give the Greek verb and its meaning from which either “aesthetic” or “synthetic” are derived.
αἰσθάνομαι – {FEEL / PERCEIVE} // τίθημι – {PLACE / PUT / SET}

4.	What politician defeated the Spartans at the battle of Cyzicus in 410 B.C. but had previously served on the Spartan side, after defecting from the Athenians, in the aftermath of the Mutilation of the Herms?
ALCIBIADES
	B1: Alcibiades was again expelled from Athenian command after what disastrous battle of 407?
NOTION / NOTIUM

5.	What diphthong is the result of contracting epsilon and omicron, replaces the normal first-declension genitive singular in masculine nouns, and stands on its own in a particle meaning “not”?
ου / OMICRON UPSILON
B1: Give the first person singular, imperfect active indicative of the contract verb ποιέω.
ἐποίουν
         
6.	What author, once thought to have feuded with Callimachus, avoided the traditional characterization of his epic hero and focused on a group adventure in his four-book poem on Jason and the Argonauts?
APOLLONIUS OF RHODES
B1: Apollonius may have succeeded or been succeeded by what man as head of the Alexandrian Library, a scientist who calculated the Earth’s circumference and studied the chronology of Greek history?
ERATOSTHENES 

7.	What Greek region saw all the following? The king who chased Dionysus with an ox-goad, Lycurgus. The death of Heracles’s pal Abderus to some man-eating mares. The Maenads killing the bard Orpheus.
THRACE
	B1: Thrace’s sub-area of Phlegra also saw what conflict, which saw islands like Cos and Sicily used to subdue the initial aggressors?
GIGANTOMACHY // WAR BETWEEN GODS and GIANTS

8.	What general category of meaning is shared between the nouns θάλαττα and ποταμός, both of which are full of ὕδωρ?
BODIES OF WATER [PROMPT FOR LESS SPECIFICITY ON “SEA” OR “RIVER”]
B1: The noun forms θάλαττα meaning “sea” and γλῶττα meaning “tongue” have a change in consonants that is unique to Attic Greek, and their English derivatives reflect the forms in other dialects. Give the standard form for either of those words as it appears in other dialects.
θάλασσα or γλῶσσα

9.	Governed by a wanax and writing in Linear B, what people built the “Lion’s Gate” in the city they are named after, were investigated by Schliemann after the Trojans, and took over from the Minoans?
MYCENAEANS
	B1: Whose face did Schliemann claim to have gazed into when he found a golden death mask on one of his digs?
AGAMEMNON(’S)

10.	What daughter of Iardanus saw her new servant kill Syleus and even capture the Cercopes, while she wore his lion skin and brandished his club and he put on women’s clothes in Lydia?
OMPHALE
B1: The whole reason Heracles was stuck in this mess was because he tossed what man off the walls of Tiryns? He was a son of Eurytus that simply was looking for his father’s cattle.
IPHITUS

11.	Works such as De Caelo show what author’s interest in natural science, though he is more known for the theoretical works Politics, Rhetoric, Poetics, and Nicomachean Ethics?
ARISTOTLE
	B1: Name either the building in which Aristotle established his philosophical school or the school itself.
LYCEUM // PERIPATETIC (SCHOOL)

12.	In order to express ideas such as “to ransom” and “to obey,” Greeks would use verbs like λύω and πείθω in what voice, which often looks identical to the passive?
MIDDLE (VOICE)
	B1: The verb ἀκούω has a deponent future; that is, its future forms use middle endings with active meanings. With that in mind, say in Greek, “you all will listen.”
(ὑμεῖς) (πάντες) ἀκούσεσθε

13.	500 goats were sacrificed annually in remembrance of what battle, where only 192 Athenians died under the command of Callimachus and Miltiades, repelling a Persian invasion force in 490 B.C.?
MARATHON
	B1: While 192 Athenians died, many forget that 11 soldiers from what city also died at Marathon? This city was the site of a 479 B.C. battle where Greeks led by Pausanias defeated the Persians.
PLATAEA
	
14.	What type of Greek pottery featured a wide, flat, shallow design with two horizontal handles and was used for drinking?
KYLIX
B1: What type of Greek pottery, usually S-shaped and made of terracotta, was used for either drinking or pouring libations? 
RHYTON
	
15.	Translate into English: οὐκ ἔλιπον τοὺς ἐμοὺς ἀδελφούς. Keep in mind that ἔλιπον is the first person aorist of λείπω.
I DID NOT ABANDON MY BROTHERS
B1: Now translate into English: πότε ἔσται ἀντὶ πολέμου εἰρήνη;
WHEN WILL THERE BE PEACE INSTEAD OF WAR?
2024 NJCL Ἀγών
 FINAL ROUND 

1.	What event, founded either by the Dactyl Heracles or Zeus after he beat Cronus in wrestling in Elis, is taking place once more 2800 years later outside of Greece in Paris?
OLYMPIC GAMES
B1: What king continued the tradition, holding a footrace among his sons Aetolus, Epeius, and Paeon?
ENDYMION

2.	Auletes, Euergetes, Soter, and Philadelphos were all epithets of what dynasty, the longest ruling dynasty of the Diadochi, which would last until the death of Cleopatra and the fall of Egypt to Roman control? 
PTOLEMAIC (DYNASTY) // PTOLEMIES
	B1: Which of the epithets in the tossup refers to the dynasty’s founder, a somatophylax and general of Alexander the Great?
SOTER

3.	The Dadauchos and Hierophantes oversaw what event, where mystae, or initiates, performed rites such as sacrificing pigs, running into the sea, and drinking Kykeon to honor Demeter and Persephone?
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES
B1: What entirely female festival is often associated with the Eleusinian Mysteries and is also the subject of a play by Aristophanes?
THESMOPHORIA

4.	Using γράμμα, γράμματος for “letter” and παρέχω for “provide,” say in good Attic Greek: “The wise letters provide honor.” Keep in mind that neuter plural subjects need a singular verb.
{τὰ σοφὰ γράμματα // τὰ γράμματα τὰ σοφὰ} (τὴν) τιμὴν παρέχει
	B1: Now using μέγας and ἐλπίς, say in good Attic Greek: “We have great hope of victory.”
μεγαλὴν νίκης ἐλπίδα ἔχομεν

5.	What author died in 292 B.C. near Piraeus by drowning after penning Dyscolus and using stock character types such as the greedy old man and the braggart soldier that proliferated in New Comedy? 
MENANDER
B1: Aristophanes’s last two plays are classified as Middle Comedy. Name either of them — one about women taking over the government, the other about a blind god.
ECCLESIAZUSAE or PLUTUS

6.	What man built a ship on the advice of Athena to flee his brother in Africa, ending up in Argos where he hatched a plan to kill his nephews with his daughters, who all obeyed him except Hypermnestra?
DANAUS
B1: Danaus laid claim to the throne of Argos since he was a descendant of what woman, a daughter of one of Argos’s three main rivers?
IO

7.	Make the demonstrative οὗτος agree with the participle form κελεύσαντι, keeping in mind that οὗτος changes its stem to τουτ- in oblique cases and should be masculine dative singular.
τούτῳ
	B1: Now make the demonstrative ἐκεῖνος agree with the participle form κελεύσουσιν.
ἐκείνοις

8.	What ruler built a stone trackway to ferry ships across the Isthmus, helping him lead his home city on the Isthmus to its greatest prosperity after he took over from his father, the Corinthian tyrant Cypselus?
PERIANDER
	B1: Periander’s father Cypselus took his name from being smuggled out of Corinth in what manner?
HIDDEN IN A {BOX / CHEST / JAR}

9.	What author depicts Atossa uttering dark portents and the battle of Plataea predicted by Darius’s ghost in a play known as the only surviving historical tragedy, The Persians? 
AESCHYLUS
	B1: What play about the Danaids, often considered Aeschylus’ worst work, shares a title with a tragedy about the Seven Against Thebes by Euripides?
SUPPLIANTS / SUPPLIANT MAIDENS / SUPPLIANT WOMEN / SUPPLICĒS / ἱκέτιδες 

10.	From what Greek word do we derive the English words “surgery,” “liturgy,” “argon” — which begins with an “alpha privative” prefix — and “energy”?
ἔργον
B1: What general category of meaning is shared between the roots of “gamut” and “jot”?
LETTERS (OF THE ALPHABET)

11.	What grandson of Tityus led to the eventual creation of Thera when Triton’s gift ended up in the sea and famously enabled the Argonauts to pass through the Symplegades after sending a dove through it? 	
EUPHEMUS
B1: Euphemus was from what city, a common entrance to the Underworld for mortals?
TAENARUM

12.	What property of a word is categorized with terms like “properispomenon,” affects elements like the antepenult or ultima, and indicates where a word should have a rise or fall in pitch when pronounced?
ACCENTUATION
	B1: Consider the phrase ἄνθρωπός τις, in which τις is an enclitic and ἄνθρωπος is generally accented with an acute on the antepenult. What changes about the accentuation of ἄνθρωπος when it appears before τις?
IT GETS A SECOND ACUTE ACCENT ON THE ULTIMA

13.	What group included a notable enemy of Alcaeus, a philosopher who predicted an eclipse, the Athenian lawgiver Solon, and other individuals from Archaic Greece known for their wise and pithy sayings?
SEVEN SAGES
B1: Name both the enemy of Alcaeus who became tyrant of Mitylene and the philosopher who predicted an eclipse and believed the primary substance to be water.
PITTACUS and THALES

14.	During what event did a force camped near Epipolae spot a lunar eclipse, resulting in Nicias waiting to sail home and the rout of his fleet by Syracusans, perhaps Athens’ greatest military disaster?
SICILIAN EXPEDITION
	B1: What Spartan general was sent to help the Syracusans fortify their city?
GYLIPPUS

15.	Noun forms such as χεῖρε and ὀφθαλμοῖν, as well as the adjectives ἄμφω and δύο, display what number almost never used in Attic prose?
DUAL
B1: Give the dative dual of ἀδελφή.
ἀδελφαῖν

16.	What creatures were the sources of various problems like carrying off Dexamenus’s daughter, stirring up a fight at the wedding of Hippodamia and Pirithous, and going crazy over some freshly opened wine?
CENTAUR(S)
B1: Who was the lead centaur in both the story of Dexamenus’s daughter and the wedding of Hippodamia and Pirithous?
EURYTION

17.	Who supposedly received the poem Cypria as his daughter’s dowry, composed the mock epic Batrachomyomachia, and created what Aristotle considered the precursor to comedy with his Margites?
HOMER
B1: What island, perhaps the most famous supposed home of the legendary bard, had a guild of rhapsodes named Homeridae and is referenced as the author’s home in the Homeric Hymn to Apollo?
CHIOS

18.	What verb has compounds meaning “it is useful” and “it makes a difference,” with συν- and δια-, has οἴσω and ἤνεγκα as its future and aorist, and has a Latin cognate with similarly irregular principal parts?
φέρω
	B1: What verb has the future and aorist ὄψομαι and εἶδον?
ὁράω

19.	What battle — whose aftermath saw Megalopolis and the Arcadian League established to keep Sparta in check — was a victory for Thebans led by Epaminondas against Spartan hegemony in 371 B.C.?
BATTLE OF LEUCTRA
B1: What Spartan king was defeated at Leuctra?
CLEOMBROTUS

20.	Translate the following sentence into English: ὁ ἄγγελος ἔλεγεν ὅτι ὁ στρατηγὸς ἐνίκησε.
THE MESSENGER {SAID // WAS SAYING} THAT THE GENERAL (HAD) {WON / CONQUERED}
B1: Now translate the following sentence: οἱ πόλλοι οὕτως ἔχαιρον ὥστε τρεῖς ἡμέρας ἔπιον. Keep in mind that ἔπιον is an aorist form from πίνω.
THE {MANY // MASSES} REJOICED SO MUCH THAT THEY DRANK FOR THREE DAYS
