2025 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 1

1.	For the phrase ὁ ξένος, give the dative singular.	τῷ ξένῳ
	B1: Now make the phrase τῷ ξένῳ accusative plural.	τοὺς ξένους

2.	A gold statue would be dedicated at Delphi if an archon violated the laws of what man, who worked to help the poorest people of Athens and passed founding pieces of legislation?	SOLON
B1: 	According to Demades, what Athenian law-giver metaphorically wrote his homicide laws in blood?		DRACO

3.	Who gave his approval to the Peace of Philocrates and countered Aeschines’s assertions of broken laws in On the Peace and On the Crown, two of the speeches that made him Athens’s best orator?
DEMOSTHENES
B1: 	How many rhetoricians made up the standard canon of Attic orators?	TEN

4.	What English word, derived from the Ancient Greek words for “small” and “sound,” is a device used to transmit or record sounds? 	MICROPHONE
B1: 	Provide both Ancient Greek words at the root of “microphone.”	μικρός and φωνή

5.	What city was peacefully co-ruled by Antiope’s sons who built its walls, Zethus and Amphion, but was the center of turmoil under the brothers Eteocles and Polynices, the sons of Oedipus?	THEBES
B1: 	Eteocles and Polynices’s conflict led to what two expeditions to sack Thebes?
7 AGAINST THEBES and EPIGON(O)I
         
6.	What human sense would be performed using your ὀφθαλμός and is performed with the verbs βλέπω as well as ὁράω?	SIGHT / SEEING / LOOKING
B1: 	What is the meaning of the word πρόσωπον, which derives from a preposition and a synonym of ὀφθαλμός?	FACE

7.	Note to players, the answer is not a person. The silver mines of Laurion gave funds to developing the “wooden wall” of what things, which replaced pentaconters and gave the Athenians naval dominance?
BOATS [ACCEPT “TRIREMES” AND “WARSHIPS”, 
DO NOT ACCEPT OR PROMPT ON ANY OTHER KIND OF VESSEL]
B1: 	What Athenian statesman pushed for the development of the navy before his ostracism in 472?
THEMISTOCLES

8.	Who claims that he put aside his plow at direction from the Muses to sing of the generations of the gods, a task which resulted in the Theogony?	HESIOD 
B1: 	To whom does Hesiod address his didactic poem Works and Days?	(HIS BROTHER) PERSES
9.	Translate the form βάλλειν, which comes from βάλλω and is the present active infinitive.
TO {THROW / HIT}
B1: 	Now translate the form κελεύει, which is also a present form.
{HE / SHE / THEY} {ORDER(S) / URGE(S)}

10.	Fought by the Athenians and by Heracles, what people from Themiscyra chased Theseus after he kidnapped their queen Antiope and went to Troy led by Penthesileia?	AMAZONS
B1: 	Who might have been the first Greek person to have encountered the Amazons, before reaching Egypt where she gave birth to Epaphus?	IO

11.	A lightning strike and the burning of a temple to Artemis were both omens surrounding the birth of what man who led cavalry at Chaeronea before cutting the Gordian knot and conquering Persia in the 330s?		ALEXANDER (THE GREAT)
B1: 	Who was the father of Alexander the Great that led the victorious army at Chaeronea?	PHILIP II

12.	Which of the following buildings was not on the Athenian Acropolis: Parthenon, Erechtheum, Temple of Olympian Zeus, Temple of Athena Nike?	TEMPLE OF OLYMPIAN ZEUS
B1: 	Part of the Erechtheum is the “Porch of the Maidens,” or six caryatids—sculptured maidens that function as what objects?	COLUMNS / PILLARS

13.	Say in Greek: “The god is large.”	ὁ θεὸς {μακρός (ἐστιν) // μέγας (ἐστίν)}
B1: 	Say in Greek: “You are a poet.”	(σὺ) ποιητὴς εἶ
	
14.	What general field of study was discussed by writers such as Thales and Heraclitus and in works such as Crito, Phaedo, Symposium, and Republic by Plato?	PHILOSOPHY
B1: 	What other author of Socratic dialogues, more known for an autobiographical military work, wrote another work called Symposium as well as a collection of anecdotes entitled Memorabilia?	
		XENOPHON
	
15.	Identified with St. Elmo’s Fire, what pair of brothers fought the twins Idas and Lynceus causing them to alternate days in Hades and Olympus, and stormed Athens to save their sister Helen?
CASTOR and POLLUX // (SPARTAN) DIOSCURI
B1: 	The dispute with Idas and Lynceus was over what animals, another set of which were relocated to Thrinacia after Alcyoneus kept bothering them?	CATTLE / COWS

2025 NJCL Ἀγών
 ROUND 2

1.	What name is shared by a king who centered his government at Persepolis and led an invasion of Greece in the 490s and a king who was vanquished by Alexander, leading to the demise of the Persian Empire?		DARIUS
B1: 	What son-in-law of Darius I conquered Thrace and led the Persian loss at Plataea in 479?
MARDONIUS 

2.	Translate into English: “ὁ ἥλιος ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ μένει.” Keep in mind that μένω means “to remain.”
THE SUN REMAINS IN THE SKY
B1: 	Now translate into English: “πέμπε τὸν ἀδελφὸν εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν!”
SEND {THE / YOUR} BROTHER INTO THE {HOUSE / BUILDING}!

3.	Which of the following regions was furthest north: Laconia, Attica, Macedonia, Thessaly?		MACEDONIA
B1: 	What city in Macedonia acted as the capital after Archelaus moved it from Aegae?	PELLA

4.	An insect effectively ended the career of what rash man, who used the help of Polyidus and a mythical beast to defeat the Solymi, Amazons, and even the fire-breathing Chimaera?
BELLEROPHON(TES) / HIPPONOUS
B1: 	Bellerophon was fighting so many people because of the queen Stheneboea. Give both the name of her husband who sent Bellerophon away and her father whom Bellerophon served.
PROETUS and IOBATES (RESPECTIVELY)

5.	Supposedly introducing both decorated scenery and a third actor to his plays, what author of Trachinian Women and three plays about Oedipus and his family was the second of the three major tragedians?		SOPHOCLES
B1: 	Name the three extant Sophoclean tragedies about Oedipus or his family.
OEDIPUS {REX // TYRANNUS // THE KING}, OEDIPUS AT COLONUS, ANTIGONE
         
6.	Differentiate in meaning between σῶμα and στόμα. Bear in mind that these are both body parts.
		BODY and MOUTH
B1:	Differentiate in meaning between the third-declension nouns πράξις and τάξις.
		{ACTION / PRACTICE} and {ARRANGEMENT / ORDER}

7.	Born at either Eresos or Mytilene, what author lends their name to a certain meter, was hailed as the 10th Muse, and often wrote about the love between women?	SAPPHO
B1: 	In what dialect of Ancient Greek, which features many archaisms, did Sappho write?	AEOLIC
8.	Watched by the κρυπτεία and subject to an annual beating, what group of people took a stand on Mount Ithome after an earthquake in 464 B.C. trying to free themselves from Sparta’s serfdom?
HELOTS [ACCEPT “SUBJUGATED PEOPLE OF SPARTA” 
OR OBVIOUS EQUIVALENTS UNTIL SPARTA]
B1: 	What general from Athens, who had discovered Theseus’s tomb, led an army to help Sparta fight off this rebellion, only to be turned around?	CIMON

9.	The Thracian king Lycurgus was punished for offending what god, who turned Tyrrhenian pirates into dolphins for trying to kidnap him and even caused the Theban king Pentheus to be torn apart?
BACCHUS / DIONYSUS
B1: 	What king of Argos also rejected Dionysus’s worship, but died to a stray flying object?	ACRISIUS

10.	Note to players, there will be a clue after the question is read twice. Complete the following analogy: παῖς is to παιδός as ἵππος is to [blank]. [παιδός is the genitive singular form of παῖς.]	ἵππου
B1: 	Now complete this analogy: παῖς is to παῖδες as ὅπλον is to [blank].	ὅπλα

11.	Thinking she would gain Achilles as a son-in-law, who unknowingly sent her daughter to die at Aulis and later welcomed the seer Cassandra and her husband Agamemnon before killing them both?
CLYTEMNESTRA
B1: 	Orestes would go on to avenge the death of Agamemnon by killing Clytemnestra with the help of Electra and what friend of his?	PYLADES

12.	Whose house was spared by Alexander the Great upon Thebes’s destruction, since his choral poetry had nobly commemorated the Nemean, Pythian, and Olympian victors, making him the greatest lyric poet?		PINDAR
B1:	Which other panhellenic games did Pindar write Odes about, besides the Nemean, Pythian, and Olympic games?	ISTHMIAN (GAMES)

13.	What English word, which derives from καλός and γράφω, refers to someone skilled in the art of decorative handwriting?	CALLIGRAPHER
B1: 	Which Greek adjective with what meaning lies at the root of baritone, hyperbaric, and barium?
βαρύς,( -εία, -ύ,) HEAVY
	
14.	The Mothax Gylippus completely neutralized the invasion of what location by Athens, an invasion commanded by Lamachus and Nicias after the mutilation of the herms by Alcibiades?	SICILY
B1:	What sort of natural event took place, slowing down the Athenian retreat and furthering the disaster?
(LUNAR) ECLIPSE
	
15.	Keeping in mind that a θύρα is a door, please complete the following command when recognized by the spotter: βαῖνε πρὸς τὴν θύραν.	PLAYER SHOULD (GET UP AND) GO TO THE DOOR
B1: 	Now complete this command: λέγετε Ἀγγλιστὶ "Ἑλλάδα φιλοῦμεν."
PLAYERS SHOULD SAY IN ENGLISH “WE LOVE GREECE”

2025 NJCL Ἀγών
ROUND 3
	
1.	The divisions of what author’s work were named after the Muses, since it comprised exactly nine books that related the events of the Persian Wars and revolutionized the genre of history?
HERODOTUS (OF HALICARNASSUS)
B1: 	According to some accounts, Herodotus died at what city in Magna Graecia?	THURII / THURIUM

2.	What island featured a burial mound topped with an oar to commemorate a young and drunk sailor, lions and wolves that would fawn over people, and a woman who transformed men with magic?
AEAEA
B1: 	Odysseus briefly left Aeaea to visit the Underworld where he chatted with what three people first?
ELPENOR, ANTICLEIA, TIRESIAS [THIS IS IN ORDER IF THEY SPECIFY]

3.	Provide the English for the numbers at the roots of “tetrarchy” and “octagon.”	FOUR and EIGHT
B1: 	Tetrarchy is a form of government wherein four people hold power over a state. Give the Greek verb at the root of “tetrarchy.”	ἄρχω (TO {RULE / BEGIN / INITIATE})

4.	Socrates oversaw the execution of 8 generals connected to what battle, which saw Athens sink 75 Peloponnesian ships but due to a storm fail to save their fellow sailors in 406?
		(BATTLE OF) ARGINUSAE (ISLANDS)
B1:	Athens won this battle despite what major general of theirs being blockaded at Mytilene?	CONON

5.	What is the meaning of the Greek abbreviation κ.τ.λ. which stands for καὶ τὰ λοιπά and can be used interchangeably with the Latin etc.?	AND THE {REST // OTHER THINGS}
B1: 	Turns out there aren’t that many readily available Greek phrases, mottos, abbreviations, or quotations to the same degree as our Latin-speaking counterparts. With that said, however, there is one state of the union whose motto is Greek rather than Latin. What state west of the Mississippi has a Greek motto?		CALIFORNIA
         
6.	Antipater of Tarsus, Diogenes of Babylon, and Panaetius of Rhodes all led what school of philosophy founded by Zeno which was espoused by the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius in his Meditations?		STOICISM // STOICS 
B1: 	What other school of philosophy, promoting ἀταραξία as the ultimate purpose of philosophy, had a community known as “the Garden”?	EPICUREANISM // EPICUREANS


7.	Differentiate in mythological name between a woman who avenged her brothers by killing her son Meleager and a princess of Troezen who showed a rock that hid a pair of sandals for her son Theseus.
ALTHAEA and AETHRA
B1: 	In some versions of her story, Aethra might have been taken as an enslaved person for what woman, whom Theseus might have kidnapped in her youth?	HELEN

8.	Of the words βασιλεύς, πόλις, τέκνον, and ἀργύριον, which is being described by the following sentence: τῇ μητρί τε καὶ τῷ πατρὶ πείθεται. 	τέκνον
B1: 	Of the words βασιλεύς, πόλις, ἔθνος, and ἀργύριον, which is being described by the following sentence:  τοῦτο τὸ ὄνομα ὅμοιον τῷ "ἄστυ" ἐστίν.	πόλις

9.	What city, ruled by the royal clan of Bacchiads, their overthrower Cypselus, and his son Periander, developed black-figure pottery and founded the cities of Corcyra and Syracuse?	CORINTH
B1:	What was the highest office in Corinth, which the Bacchiads would pass to one another annually?
		PRYTANIS

10.	Offered a long life of sight byHelios, what blind seer-king from Salmydessus was finally able to eat again thanks to the Boreades — Zetes and Calais — saving him from the Harpies?	PHINEUS
B1: 	Phineus might have also been blinded for showing what earlier young man his way east after he had recently lost his sister?	PHRIXUS

11.	μῆνιν ἄειδε θεὰ Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος is the opening line of what Ancient Greek work, that commands a goddess to sing of the wrath of Achilles in the 10th year of the Trojan War?	(HOMER’S) ILIAD
B1: 	Now complete the following opening line with the missing Ancient Greek word. This word’s translation by Emily Wilson sparked some controversy. ἄνδρα μοι ἔννεπε, μοῦσα, [blank].
πολύτροπον

12.	Of the prepositions ἀνά, διά, μετά, σύν, and, ὑπέρ, which CANNOT be found with the genitive case?		σύν
B1: 	σύν takes only the dative case. Give another preposition that can take the dative case.
		ἀνά, ἐν, ἐπί, περί, πρός, ὑπό

13.	What city saw the murder of a commentator on Diophantus and great mathematician, Hypatia, as well as the death of a queen who refused to be paraded in a triumph and poisoned herself, Cleopatra VII?
		ALEXANDRIA
B1:	Hypatia also had constructed what physical star charts that mimicked the half-dome of the sky?
		ASTROLABE(S)

14.	Which of the following buildings was not on the Athenian Acropolis: Parthenon, Erechtheum, Temple of Olympian Zeus, Temple of Athena Nike?	TEMPLE OF OLYMPIAN ZEUS
B1: 	Part of the Erechtheum is the “Porch of the Maidens,” or six caryatids—sculptured maidens that function as what objects?	COLUMNS / PILLARS
	
15.	Translate into English, keeping in mind that στρατηγός means “general”: “τοὺς τοῦ στρατηγοῦ ἵππους ἔχομεν.”	WE HAVE THE GENERAL’S HORSES 
B1: 	Translate into English: ὁ στρατηγὸς τὴν μάχην ἔλειπεν.
THE GENERAL {WAS LEAVING / WAS ABANDONING // 
LEFT / ABANDONED} THE BATTLE 
2025 NJCL Ἀγών
 FINAL ROUND 

1.	Carried off by pirates, what Cretan woman found her way to Eleusis, where she took care of Metaneira’s son Demophoon, secretly trying to immortalize him while hiding her true identity, Demeter?	
		DOSO [PROMPT ON “DEMETER” UNTIL “DEMETER”]
B1: 	Eventually, Demeter commanded the establishment of the Eleusinian Mysteries. What daughter of hers, known as “the mistress,” was one of the deities worshipped?	DESPOINA

2.	Deciphered by John Chadwick and Michael Ventris, what Bronze Age, ancient syllabic script predated the Greek alphabet and might have adapted the previous “A” variety? 	LINEAR B
B1: 	What archaeologist discovered hundreds of Linear B tables at Pylos, but is more famous perhaps for his discovery of the palace complex at Knossos?	(ARTHUR) EVANS

3.	A ruler of what city commissioned a statue of a torc-wearing man called the “Dying Gaul,” as well as a monumental structure depicting the Gigantomachy that functioned as an altar for the Attalids?
		PERGAMON / PERGAMUM
B1: 	Today, the altar is in a namesake museum in what city, though it will be mostly closed until 2043?
BERLIN

4.	Say in Greek using λύω and παῖς: “He will release the child.”	{τὸν / τὴν} παῖδα λύσει
	B1: Now say in Greek using ἄρχω and the genitive: “He was beginning an unjust war.”
{ἦρχεν / ἤρχετο} ἀδίκου πολέμου

5.	Who wrote treatises like Meteorologica and On the Heavens in addition to better-known, non-scientific works such as the Rhetoric, the Politics, and the Poetics?	ARISTOTLE
B1: 	Aristotle’s Physics describes four types of what things—material, formal, moving, and final?	CAUSES

6.	What pair of brothers, who defeated Nestor in chariot racing, helped Augeias fight Heracles, were named Cteatus and Eurytus, and might have been conjoined sons of Poseidon and Molione?
		MOLIONES / ACTORIONES [ACCEPT “CTEATUS and EURYTUS” UNTIL “CTEATUS”]
B1:	Although he lost to the Moliones, Nestor did mention in the Iliad how he had defeated what son of Phylacus, who could run so fast he would not bend cornstalks, in a footrace?	IPHICLUS




7.	Listen carefully to the following passage about the misadventures of Odysseus’ men on Aeaea, which I will read twice, then answer the questions that follow in ENGLISH:

	οἱ δὲ τὴν τῆς Κίρκης οἰκίαν εὑρίσκουσιν ἐν μέσῃ ὕλῃ οὖσαν. ἐγγὺς δὲ τῆς οἰκίας πολλούς τε λύκους ὁρῶσι καὶ πολλοὺς λέοντας. τούτους δὲ ὁρῶντες μάλα φοβοῦνται καὶ πρὸς τῇ θύρᾳ μένουσιν. ἔπειτα δὲ τῆς Κίρκης ἀκούουσιν ἔνδον ᾀδούσης. καλοῦσιν οὖν αὐτήν.

	Why do the men wait at Circe’s door?	THEY ARE (VERY) SCARED (OF HER WOLVES /  LIONS)
B1: 	What is Circe doing before the men call out to her?	SINGING (INSIDE)

8.	Having advised Xerxes not to strike early at Salamis, who led a contingent of ships from Halicarnassus to support the Persians and eventually rammed her ship into an ally to protect her fellow Carians?
		ARTEMISIA (I)
B1:	Another Artemisia was a later queen of Caria who helped complete a mausoleum for what husband of hers, a Persian satrap who incited rebellions against Athens?	MAUSOLUS

9.	Though he supposedly equated a μέγα βιβλίον to a μέγα κακόν, or a “big book” to a “big evil,” what poet’s Aetia — which contained the Lock of Berenice — was one of the longest Hellenistic works?
CALLIMACHUS
B1: 	Although didactic, elegy, and epyllion seem to have been the major genres of Hellenistic poetry, what author from that period wrote an extant four-book epic?	APOLLONIUS OF RHODES

10.	Which of the following words, if any, is not derived from the same Greek root as the others: glamor, grasp, grammar, graft? 	GRASP
B1: 	Which of these words, if any, is not from the same root: hypotenuse, intonation, tendon, tetanus?
ALL FROM THE SAME // NONE

11.	What sort of animal cured Battus of his stammer, was wrestled by Aristaeus’s mother Cyrene, and was either killed by Alcathous to earn Megara or Heracles to help Thespius near Cithaeron?	LION
B1:	Battus had actually gone on to found Cyrene, a fate destined since what Argonaut got a clod of earth?
		EUPHEMUS

12.	For the verb μάχομαι, give the second person plural, present indicative.	μάχεσθε
B1: 	Now give the first person plural, present indicative of ἀφικνέομαι.	ἀφικνούμεθα

13.	Who described Praxagora’s followers taking over the government, a hero riding a dung-beetle to heaven, a journey to cloud-cuckoo-land, and Lysistrata’s instigation of a sex strike in some of his Old comedies? 		ARISTOPHANES
B1: 	Which play of Aristophanes contains a debate between Aeschylus and Euripides as to which is the greatest tragedian?	THE FROGS

14.	What brilliant general refused to sign a treaty with Agesilaus because he could not sign for Boeotia, leading to Cleombrotus’s failed attempt at Leuctra in 371 to defeat him, Pelopidas, and the Thebans?
		EPAMINONDAS
B1: 	Pelopidas had been instrumental at Leuctra because he led what special group of warriors?
		SACRED BAND OF THEBES

15.	Translate into English this sentence containing a comparative adjective: οὗτος ὁ ἀνὴρ τῶν θεῶν σοφώτερός ἐστιν. 	THIS MAN IS WISER THAN THE GODS
B1: 	Now translate into English: πολλὰ δίδωσιν ὁ Ζεὺς τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς. 
ZEUS GIVES MANY THINGS TO GOOD (MEN / PEOPLE)

16.	Because of a portent, Gelanor ceded the throne of Argos to what son of Belus, who outsmarted his greedy brother when every daughter except Hypermnestra killed their cousins, the Aegyptids?
DANAUS
B1: 	When the Danaids first landed in Argos, Danaus had them search for water. For what daughter of his, the mother of Nauplius, was the spring of Lerna created and renamed?	AMYMONE

17.	What name is shared between an adulterer whose murder was the subject of a speech by Lysias and a chief librarian at Alexandria who very accurately calculated the circumference of the earth?
ERATOSTHENES
B1: 	What event is Eratosthenes the polymath also credited with dating to the late 1180’s B.C.?
SACK OF TROY

18.	What meaning is shared by the verbs τελευτάω and ἀποθνῄσκω?	
(I / TO) DIE [DO NOT ACCEPT ANY OTHER MEANINGS OF τελευτάω]
B1: 	What meaning is shared by the verbs δράω, and πράττω?	(I / TO) {DO / MAKE} 

19.	Named since the rivers flowed around the city on three sides, what city was the site of the final clash between the so-called pestles Brasidas and Cleon, ending in a Spartan victory in 422?	
AMPHIPOLIS
B1:	The city was later used to put what daughter of a Sogdian noble under house arrest?	
ROXANE

20.	What city, one of whose rulers supposedly yelled “μολὼν λαβέ” at enemies, encouraged its youths to return “ἢ τὰν ἢ ἐπὶ τᾶς”—that is, “with their shields or on them”?	SPARTA
B1: 	Leonidas supposedly yelled “μολὼν λαβέ” before Thermopylae. After a different Greco-Persian battle, a messenger arrived to Athens and merely said “νενικήκαμεν” before collapsing. Translate this. 
WE (HAVE) {WON / CONQUERED}
