TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns mens and mensa.
ANS: mens, mind
mensa, table

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the adverbs ibi and ubi.
ANS: ibi, there/in that place
ubi, where/when

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns regia and regnum.
ANS: regia, [royal] palace
regnum, kingdom/royal power


TOSSUP: Give the principal parts of the verb that functions as the passive of facio.
ANS: fio, fieri, factusl -um [sum]

BONUS: In the motto Fiat Lux, what tense and mood are Fiat?
ANS: present subjunctive

BONUS: Change fiat to the present indicative.
ANS: fit


TOSSUP: Who became consul of Rome in the same year Julius Caesar became pontifex maximus?
ANS: Cicero

BONUS: To what Greek orator is Cicero often compared?
ANS: Demosthenes

BONUS: What other orator of Rome was Cicero's main rival?
ANS: Hortensius


TOSSUP: What mythological figure possessed the ability to understand the language of animals?
ANS: Melampus

BONUS: How did Melampus acquire this unusual skill?
ANS: baby snakes cleaned his ears with their tongues after he gave proper
burial to their mother and adopted them

BONUS: What advice about the king's ill son did Melampus overhear from vultures?
ANS: to remove a knife from a tree, make a drink with the rust, and make the
boy drink it


TOSSUP: Who, though a slave, was Cicero's literary consultant and private secretary?
ANS: Tiro

BONUS: When Cicero freed Tiro, what name did Tiro take?
ANS: Marcus Tullius Tiro

BONUS: Tiro invented what are called notae Tironianae. What would we call this invention?
ANS: shorthand


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/NN, Round 1 Page 1


TOSSUP: Listen to the following sentence: Dic mihi quis haec carmina scripserit. What is the
construction quis .. scripserit called?
ANS: indirect question

BONUS: What is the tense and mood of scripserit?
ANS: perfect subjunctive

BONUS: Change quis haec carmina scripserit to a direct question.
ANS: Quis haec carmina scripsit?


TOSSUP: The Underworld is a strange and mysterious place in classical mythology. The Underworld
has its own rulers, as well as its own geography. In Tartarus, what was unique about the
Plegathon River?
ANS: It was always on fire.

BONUS: What special property is attributed to the Lethe River?
ANS: People who drink it forget everything they know.

BONUS: What river do newly arrived souls cross by way of Charon's ferry?
ANS: Styx


TOSSUP: Some people just never seem to be quiet. Ovid referred to this urge, which he called studium
immane loquendi. Translate this quote.
ANS: an insatiable/huge desire for talking

BONUS: Another quote from Ovid reveals the author's reason for writing his poetry. Translate
scribere iussit Amor.
ANS: Love ordered [me] to write

BONUS: As you can see, love was an important topic for Ovid. Now translate another statement
about love: Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.
ANS: Love is a thing full of anxious fear.


TOSSUP: Quis scripsit libros De Officiis, De Amicitia, et De Senectute?
ANS: Cicero

BONUS: Quis scripsit Commentarios De Bello Gallico?
ANS: Caesar

BONUS: Quis scripsit Carmen Saeculare?
ANS: Horace


TOSSUP: The motto of Duke University, Eruditio et Religio, highlights two aspects of life that the
University holds very important. Translate the motto into English.
ANS: Learning and Religion

BONUS: Another easily remembered motto is the motto of North Carolina, Esse quam videri.
Translate this motto.
ANS: To be rather than to seem

BONUS: One final state motto, one short and easily translated: Translate the motto of Idaho, Esto
perpetua.
ANS: May she live/exist forever


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/IV/V, Round 1 Page 2


TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns aetas and aestas.
ANS: aetas, age/lifetime
aestas, summer

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns aestas and aestus.
ANS: aestas, summer
aestus, heat

BONUS: Give the Latin name and English meaning for one other season besides summer
ANS: autumnus, fall!
hiems, winter/ver, spring


TOSSUP: Centaurus was a monster who mated with mares grazing on Mt. Pelion. Who were the
parents of Centaurus?
ANS: ixion and a cloud (in the shape of Hera)

BONUS: What race of beings resulted in the mating of Centaurus and the mares of Mt. Pelion?
ANS: the Centaurs

BONUS: At whose wedding were the Centaurs routed in a fight after becoming "drunk and
disorderly"?
ANS: Pirithous and Hippodamia


TOSSUP: While wandering around in ancient Rome, I happened upon an area marked with a spear in the
ground. What surprised me was that a man standing on a platform was wearing a funny little
hat. What was happening to the man?
ANS: he was being sold as a slave

BONUS: What did the hat indicate?
ANS: he was not under warranty

BONUS: What was the name for the platform on which the slave was being sold?
ANS: catasta


TOSSUP: The pronouns nostri and nostrum can both be translated "of us." What is the difference in
their use?
ANS: nostri is objective genitive, nostrum is partitive genitive

BONUS: What two forms would be used to say "of you (plural)"?
ANS: vestri and vestrum

BONUS: In the singular pronouns, there is only one word for both genitives. How would you say
"of me" and "of you (singular)"?
ANS: mei and tui


TOSSUP: Where did Julius Caesar decisively defeat Pompey in 48 B.C.?
ANS: Pharsalus

BONUS: In what city did Pompey die?
ANS: Alexandria

BONUS: Where had Pompey defeated Caesar that same year?
ANS: Dyrrhachium


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/NN, Round 1 Page 3


TOSSUP: What recent movie might the Romans have called Uxor Praedictoris?
ANS: "The Preacher's Wife"

"The Preacher's Wife"
"My Fellow Americans"
"Jingle All the Way"


TOSSUP: What is the word for a scroll which has been erased and rewritten?
ANS: palimpsest

BONUS: After writing a letter, a Roman would seal it with wax into which he pressed his signet
ring. Where on his hand would he wear this ring?
ANS: knuckle of his right ring finger

BONUS: What was an ink pen made of reed called?
ANS: calamus


TOSSUP: Give the third person singular, present subjunctive, of possum.
ANS: possit

BONUS: Change possit to the imperfect.
ANS: posset

BONUS: Change posset to the first person singular.
ANS: possem


TOSSUP: In what city was Marcus Tullius Cicero born?
ANS: Arpinum

BONUS: What teacher of rhetoric instructed both Cicero and Caesar?
ANS: jApollonius] Molo

BONUS: What corrupt governor of Sicily did Cicero prosecute?
ANS: Verres


TOSSUP: Say in Latin "in a short time."
ANS: brevi tempore

BONUS: What case and construction is this phrase?
ANS: ablative of time

BONUS: What about Mei Conamericani?
ANS: eodem tempore

BONUS: What movie would be Tinnitus Totam per Viam?
ANS: 11


BONUS: Say in Latin "at the same time."
ANS: eodem tempore


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/IV/V, Round 1 Page 4

TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns Os, oris and os. ossis.
ANS: Os, oris, mouth/face
os, ossis, bone

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the prepositions inter and intra.
ANS: inter, between/among
intra, within

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the verb eo and the adverb eo.
ANS: eo (verb), go
eo (adv.), there/to that place


TOSSUP: Identify the used of the subjunctive in this sentence. Tanta tempestas orta est ut navis
frangeretur.
ANS: [Adverbial] Result Clause

BONUS: Veni ut hostes vincerem.
ANS: [Adverbial] Purpose Clause

BONUS: Timebant ne milites equos invenirent.
ANS: Subjunctive after a Clause of Fearing


TOSSUP: Who defeated the Romans at Asculum in 279 B.C.?
ANS: Pyrrhus

BONUS: Whom did Rome defeat at the Metaurus River in 207 B.C.?
ANS: Hasdrubal

BONUS: Whom did Caesar defeat at Zela in 47 B.C.?
ANS: Pharnaces


TOSSUP: Several of the Greeks called on to fight in the Trojan War attempted to escape from their
wartime responsibilities. How did Odysseus try to avoid going to Troy?
ANS: he pretended he was insane by sowing the earth with salt

BONUS: Who exposed Odysseus's ruse?
ANS: Palamedes

BONUS: How did Achilles attempt to "dodge the draft"?
ANS: he dressed as a girl


TOSSUP: I hate these laws in Rome! I want to ride my chariot through the streets of the city, but the law
won't let me. If I want to legally ride my chariot through the streets of Rome, what position
must I have?
ANS: Vestal Virgin

BONUS: Name three criteria for becoming a Vestal Virgin.
ANS: two living parents, a girl, physically flawless, between ages of 6 and 9 (any
3 of these answers)

BONUS: How long did a Vestal Virgina serve?
ANS: 30 years


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/IVN, Round 2 Page 1


TOSSUP: What speech of 70 B.C. established Cicero as chief advocate of Rome?
ANS: In Verrem

BONUS: Another speech of Cicero, the Pro Caelio, was a defense of Marcus Caelius Rufus on the
charge of attempted poisoning. What woman was behind this charge?
ANS: Clodia

BONUS: What speech did Cicero give in defense of his former teacher?
ANS: Pro Archia


TOSSUP: Name all three of Julius Caesar's wives in order.
ANS: Cornelia, Pompeia, Calpurnia

BONUS: Whom did Mark Antony and Octavian defeat at Philippi?
ANS: Cassius and Brutus

BONUS: Whom did Octavian defeat at Actium?
ANS: Mark Antony and Cleopatra


TOSSUP: What type of literature did both Livy and Tacitus write?
ANS: history/annals

BONUS: What famous writer besides Cicero wrote an account of Catiline's conspiracy?
ANS: Sallust

BONUS: What is the Latin title of another well-known work of Sallust?
ANS: Bellum Iugurthinum


TOSSUP: After whose death at Troy did the clouds rain blood?
ANS: Sarpedon

BONUS: Who killed Sarpedon at Troy?
ANS: Patroclus

BONUS: Who were the parents of Sarpedon?
ANS: Laodamia and Zeus


TOSSUP: Who were the first two consuls of Rome?
ANS: Brutus and Collatinus

BONUS: Which one put his own sons to death for treason?
ANS: Brutus

BONUS: In what year did Brutus and Collatinus serve as consuls?
ANS: 509 B.C.


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/IVN, Round 2 Page 2


TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the conjunctions ac and at.
ANS: ac, and
at, but

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the nouns ripa and rima.
ANS: ripa, [river] bank
rima, crack

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the verbs celo, celare and ceno, cenare.
ANS: celo, hide/conceal
ceno, dine


TOSSUP: Who were the parents of the fifty Nereids, the most notable of whom were Thetis, Galatea,
and Amphitrite?
ANS: Nereus and Doris

BONUS: With whom did Thetis unite in order to produce Achilles?
ANS: Peleus

BONUS: Who later became the husband of Amphitrite?
ANS: Poseidon/Neptune


TOSSUP: A lot of important information can be found in names. If a Roman had the suffix -na on his
nomen, where would he have originated?
ANS: Etruria/he was Etruscan

BONUS: What does the suffix -ianus indicate?
ANS: that one has been adopted

BONUS: What about the suffix -acas?
ANS: Gallic origins


TOSSUP: What does your doctor want you to do when he prescribes medicine with the directions
"q. i. d."?
ANS: take it four times a day
(quater in diem)

BONUS: What would you expect if your doctor prescribed your medicine to be "pulv."?
ANS: a powder

BONUS: When would you take your medicine if your doctor had directed "p.c."?
ANS: after meals (post cibum)


TOSSUP: What Roman fleet commander was killed by the eruption of Mt. Vesuvius?
ANS: Pliny the Elder

BONUS: His nephew became well-known as a writer of letters. Who was he?
ANS: Pliny the Younger

BONUS: To whom did Pliny the Younger write a letter detailing the eruption of Vesuvius?
ANS: Tacitus


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/IVN, Round 2 Page 3


TOSSUP: The threshhold of a Roman house was an important part of Roman beliefs. What is the Latin
word for "threshhold"?
ANS: lumen

BONUS: What did superstitious Romans avoid doing when they stepped over a threshhold?
ANS: doing so with their left foot

BONUS: What English word literally means "under the threshhold"?
ANS: subliminal


TOSSUP: Listen to the following sentence: Hoc nostris militibus auxilio fuit. What is the case of both
militibus and auxilio?
ANS: dative

BONUS: What is the use of the dative militibus called?
ANS: dative of reference/advantage

BONUS: What is the use of the dative auxilio called?
ANS: dative of purpose/predicative dative


TOSSUP: Everyone knows that the Roman emperor Constantine is credited with legalizing Christianity.
However, he also had a famous motto meaning "In this sign you will conquer." What is this
motto in Latin?
ANS: In hoc signo vinces

BONUS: What motto of the University of Pennsylvania means "We shall find a way or make one"?
ANS: Inveniemus viam aut faciemus

BONUS: What motto of American University in the District of Columbia means "For God and
country"?
ANS: Pro Deo et patria


TOSSUP: Give the third person plural, imperfect passive indicative, of the verb ago, agere.
ANS: agebantur

BONUS: Change agebantur to the present tense.
ANS: aguntur

BONUS: Change aguntur to the future tense.
ANS: aguntur


TOSSUP: Quis sum? Sermones et epistulam De Arte Poetica scripsi, et Carmen saeculare composui.
ANS: Horace! Horatius

BONUS: Quis sum? Libros epigrammaton scripsi.
ANS: Martial/Martialis

BONUS: Quis sum? Libros satirarum scripsi.
ANS: Juvenal/Iuvenalis


Woodson Certamen 1997 Level III/IVN, Round 2 Page 4
TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the adjective fortis and the adverb forte.
ANS: fortis, strong/brave
forte, by chance

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the verbs veho and veto.
ANS: veho, carry/bear
veto, forbid

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the impersonal verbs lucet and licet.
ANS: lucet, it is light
licet, it is permitted/allowed


TOSSUP: What use of the genitive is illustrated in this sentence? Est vir magnae virtutis.
ANS: genitive of description

BONUS: Give the same sentence with an ablative of description.
ANS: Est vir magni virtute.

BONUS: What is the use of the genitive in this sentence? Parvi eum aestimo.
ANS: genitive of value/cost


TOSSUP: What two leaders of the Populares and the Optimates developed an opposition that led to a
bloody civil war?
ANS: Marius and Sulla

BONUS: Which wife of Julius Caesar was the granddaughter of Sulla?
ANS: Pompeia

BONUS: Which political leader was actually Caesar's uncle by marriage?
ANS: Marius


TOSSUP: The Cyclops Polyphemus was usually an overgrown, uncombed, and uncouth brute of a
creature. However, one nymph made him temporarily change his ways. Name this nymph.
ANS: Galatea

BONUS: Despite the advances of Polyphemus, Galatea was in love with another man. Name
Galatea's beloved.
ANS: Acis

BONUS: After Acis was crushed by Polyphemus in a fit of jealous rage, what did the blood of
Acis turn into?
ANS: the Acis River


TOSSUP: Where would you find the following? alveus, natatio, laconicum, unctorium, apodyterium
ANS: at the baths

BONUS: What was the instrument used to scrape oil and sweat from a dirty Roman?
ANS: strigil

BONUS: After a nice bath, the Romans might play a game of trigon. How many balls were used
in trigon?
ANS: three


TOSSUP: An early Roman author, who wrote tragedies and comedies and a translation of the Odyssey,
was actually a Greek prisoner of war. Who was he?
ANS: M. Livius Andronicus

BONUS: Another early Roman comic playwright wrote Miles Gloriosus, Menaechmi, and other
comedies. Who was he?
ANS: Plautus

BONUS: A later Roman comic playwright closely followed the Greek playwright Menander. Who
was he?
ANS: Terence


TOSSUP: What unwise Satyr picked up the flute after Athena discarded it, and later challenged Apollo
to a music contest?
ANS: Marsyas

BONUS: What was Apollo's punishment for Marsyas after Apollo had won the music contest?
ANS: Marsyas was flayed alive

BONUS: What river was formed from the tears Marsyas wept while his skin was being ripped off?
ANS: the Marsyas


TOSSUP: Which "Good Emperor" built the wall in Britain known as the Antonine Wall?
ANS: Antoninus Pius

BONUS: Who built the other Roman wall in Britain?
ANS: Hadrian

BONUS: Under which emperor did the Roman Empire achieve its greatest extent?
ANS: Trajan


TOSSUP: What was the full name of the poet who wrote Copa, Dirae, Culex, the Eclogues, the
Georgics, and the Aeneid?
ANS: Publius Vergilius Maro

BONUS: By what other name are the Eclogues known?
ANS: Bucolics

BONUS: What is the topic of the Georgics?
ANS: farming


TOSSUP: Give the Latin for the motto of Oklahoma, "Work conquers all."
ANS: Labor omnia vincit

BONUS: Give the Latin for the motto of North Carolina, "To be rather than to seem."
ANS: Esse quam videri

BONUS: Give the Latin for the motto of South Carolina, "As long as I breathe, I hope."
ANS: Dum spiro, spero


TOSSUP: The names for some body parts are sometimes confused with other nouns. Distinguish in
meaning between genu and genus.
ANS: genu, knee
genus, birth/race/kind/family

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between crus and crux.
ANS: crus, leg
crux, cross

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between auris and aurum.
ANS: auris, ear
aurum, gold


TOSSUP: Everyone knows that the god Pan was not especially popular with the ladies. What nymph
was transformed into a pine tree while fleeing from Pan's unwanted advances?
ANS: Pinus

BONUS: What nymph was transformed into a reed while fleeing from Pan's amorous pursuit?
ANS: Syrinx

BONUS: What did Pan do with the reed into which Syrinx was changed, as well as the
surrounding reeds?
ANS: he made the first pan pipe, which he called his "syrinx"


TOSSUP: Close your eyes and imagine that you are at the colosseum watching a gladiator fight. My
favorite gladiator is the guy with a big fish on his helmet. What is the name for such a
gladiator?
ANS: murmillo

BONUS: What is the name for a gladiator who fought with a net and trident?
ANS: retiarius

BONUS: What is the name for a gladiator who fought with a round shield and curved sword?
ANS: Thracian


TOSSUP: The state motto of Arkansas is Regnat populus. What does this motto mean in English?
ANS: The people rule

BONUS: The University of Delaware's motto is Scientia sol mentis est. What is the English
meaning for this phrase?
ANS: Knowledge is the sun of the mind

BONUS: If your teacher told you that the only way to be successful was Studiis et rebus honestis,
what would your teacher be telling you?
ANS: By honorable pursuits and studies


TOSSUP: Name the town in Cisalpine Gaul where Decimus Brutus was besieged by Antony and where
Hirtius and Pansa were killed in 43 B.C.
ANS: Mutina

BONUS: Whom had Brutus defeated in a naval battle in 56 B.C. under Julius Caesar?
ANS: the Veneti

BONUS: What famous Roman, with whom Hirtius had carried on an extensive correspondence,
induced him to fight Antony in 43 B.C.?
ANS: Cicero


TOSSUP: In what land does the story of Pyramus and Thisbe take place?
ANS: Babylon

BONUS: What was the name of the king near whose tomb Pyramus and Thisbe were supposed to
meet?
ANS: Ninus

BONUS: What animal did Pyramus mistakenly think had killed Thisbe?
ANS: a lion


TOSSUP: What current TV show would the Romans have called Tertium Saxum a Sole?
ANS: "Third Rock from the Sun"

"Friends"
"Wings"


TOSSUP: In writing his Aeneid, which works of Homer did Vergil follow?
ANS: Iliad and Odyssey

BONUS: In writing his Odes, which two Greek lyric poets did Horace follow?
ANS: Sappho and Alcaeus

BONUS: In writing his Eclogues, which Greek pastoral poet did Vergil follow?
ANS: Theocritus


TOSSUP: Translate the sentence Carmen mihi scribendum est.
ANS: A poem must be written by me./I must write a poem.

BONUS: What is the name of the construction scribendum est?
ANS: [future] passive periphrastic

BONUS: What is the case and use of mihi in the sentence?
ANS: dative of agent


TOSSUP: Give the second person singular, perfect active indicative, of the verb duco, ducere.
ANS: duxisti

BONUS: Change duxisti to passive.
ANS: ductus/-a/-um es

BONUS: Change ductus es to subjunctive.
ANS: ductus sis

BONUS: What TV show would be Amici?
ANS: Friends

BONUS: What TV show would be Alae?
ANS: Wings

TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the infinitives servare and servire.
ANS: servare, [to] guard/keep/save
servire, [to] serve

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the two infinitives esse.
ANS: [to] be, [to] eat

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the infinitives parcere and pascere.
ANS: parcere, [to] spare
pascere, [to] feed


TOSSUP: What do we call verbs such as licet, pluit, and oportet?
ANS: impersonal verbs

BONUS: Change licet to the imperfect.
ANS: licebat

BONUS: Change licebat to the perfect.
ANS: licuit


TOSSUP: What Roman general was nicknamed "the sword of Rome"?
ANS: Marcellus

BONUS: What Gallic chieftain did Marcellus kill in hand-to-hand combat, thus winning the spolia
opima?
ANS: Viridomarus

BONUS: What city did Marcellus take after a two-year siege in 211 B.C.?
ANS: Syracuse


TOSSUP: What Giant did Heracles kill by holding the Giant up in the air, away from the earth?
ANS: Antaeus

BONUS: Who were the parents of Antaeus?
ANS: Poseidon and Ge/Gaia

BONUS: What did Antaeus do with the skulls of his victims after he had killed them?
ANS: he built a temple to his father with them


TOSSUP: After a hard day as a poor man, I enjoy the only drink I can afford. This drink is a mixture of
vinegar and water. What is it called?
ANS: posca

BONUS: What is the Latin word for "vinegar"?
ANS: acetum

BONUS: What is the Latin word for a "vinegar bottle"?
ANS: acetabulum


TOSSUP: What is the nominative plural of carmen?
ANS: carmina

BONUS: Change carmina to the accusative.
ANS: carmina

BONUS: Change carmina to the genitive.
ANS: carminum


TOSSUP: I lived from 43 B.C. to A.D. 18. I wrote the Heroides, the Fasti, and the Metamorphoses.
What is my full name?
ANS: Publius Ovidius Naso

BONUS: In what meter were the Metamorphoses written?
ANS: dactylic hexameter

BONUS: What two types of poetic feet are used in dactylic hexameter?
ANS: dactyls and spondees


TOSSUP: Who was Orpheus's mother, a well-known Muse?
ANS: Calliope

BONUS: Which of the Muses represents History?
ANS: Clio

BONUS: Which of the Muses represents Comedy?
ANS: Thalia


TOSSUP: What figure of speech consists of repetition of a word for emphasis?
ANS: anaphora

BONUS: What figure of speech consists of two nouns joined by a conjunction in place of one
modified noun?
ANS: hendiadys

BONUS: What figure of speech consists of an arrangement of words in an ABBA order?
ANS: chiasmus


TOSSUP: Cicero's cursus honorum began with his job as quaestor. Where and in what year was this?
ANS: Sicily, 75 B.C.

BONUS: What did Cicero's achievement of being a novus homo mean?
ANS: no ancestor had held a high office

BONUS: After what event did Cicero bestow upon himself the title pater patriae?
ANS: after uncovering Catiline's conspiracy


TOSSUP: Distinguish in meaning between the foods uva and plural ova.
ANS: uva, grape
ova, eggs

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the body parts genu and gena.
ANS: genu, knee
gena, cheek

BONUS: Distinguish in meaning between the animals avis and apis.
ANS: avis, bird
apis, bee


TOSSUP: Tales of lovers are common throughout mythology. What old couple was spared from the
flood and turned into trees after they treated Zeus and Hermes kindly?
ANS: Baucis and Philemon

BONUS: What two Babylonian young people killed themselves after an unfortunate
misunderstanding?
ANS: Pyramus and Thisbe

BONUS: What daughter of Miletus was turned into a fountain after she professed her love to her
brother, Caunus?
ANS: Byblis


TOSSUP: Curse this hair! Whom might I see to have my feminine locks done nicely?
ANS: an ornatrix

BONUS: What instrument was used to curl hair?
ANS: calamistrum

BONUS: Whom might a man seek to get a fresh shave?
ANS: tonsor


TOSSUP: Who wrote an eye-witness account of the eruption of Vesuvius in A.D. 79?
ANS: Pliny the Younger

BONUS: To which Roman historian did Pliny write this account?
ANS: Tacitus

BONUS: Pliny is also well-known for his many letters to which Roman emperor?
ANS: Trajan


TOSSUP: What two tenses of the subjunctive may follow a past tense main verb?
ANS: imperfect and pluperfect

BONUS: What two tenses of the subjunctive may follow a present tense main verb?
ANS: present and perfect

BONUS: What two tenses of the indicative do not exist in the subjunctive?
ANS: future and future perfect


TOSSUP: Finish the following well-known proverb: Quot homines, tot
ANS: sententiae

BONUS: Finish this one: Si vis pacem, para
ANS: bellum

BONUS: Finish this proverb: Fortes Fortuna
ANS: adiuvat


TOSSUP: What poet says, "I hate and I love"?
ANS: Catullus

BONUS: What eleven-syllable meter is frequently used by Catullus?
ANS: hendecasyllabics/Phalaecean

BONUS: What meter, frequently used by Ovid, consists of a line of dactylic hexameter followed by
a line of modified dactylic hexameter?
ANS: elegiac couplet


TOSSUP: What nymph fell in love with Hermaphroditus?
ANS: Salmacis

BONUS: After Hermaphroditus rejected Salmacis' advances, she jumped on him while he was
swimming in a spring. He could not rid himself of her, so he prayed to the gods. What
was the result of this prayer?
ANS: Hermaphroditus and Salmacis combined bodies into a creature
neither man nor woman.

BONUS: After this event, what happened to any man who entered that spring?
ANS: He turned into a hermaphrodite (half man, half woman).


TOSSUP: What is the correct form of the adjective fortis, forte to agree with the noun animos?
ANS: fortes

BONUS: Change animos fortes to the ablative plural.
ANS: animis fortibus

BONUS: Change animis fortibus to the genitive plural.
ANS: animorum fortium


TOSSUP: In British universities, there is an official excuse for students called an "aegrotat." For what
reason would a student need an aegrotat?
ANS: illness

BONUS: Another Latin verb used as a noun in English is "recipe." What mood is recipe?
ANS: imperative (singular)

BONUS: A warning is often called a "caveat." What type of subjunctive is caveat?
ANS: jussive/volitive/hortatory
