 Complete the following analogy: laudo : laudabas :: sedēo : ANSWER: sedēbas BONUS: Complete the following analogy: laudo : laudabas :: do : ______ ANSWER: dabas
 In ancient Rome, was the job of the person known as the coquus? ANSWER: cook / chef BONUS: If the coquus were to make panis, what would he be making? ANSWER: bread
 What tribune of 133 B.C proposed a revolutionary land reform bill and was killed for his radical politics? ANSWER: Tiberius Gracchus BONUS: What younger brother of Tiberius proposed another such bill ten years later? ANSWER: Gaius (Gracchus)
 Which of the following does not belong because of meaning: mus, bos, canis, stella, porcus? ANSWER: stella BONUS: : Which of the following does not belong because of meaning: unus, duo, queror, quinque, septem? ANSWER: queror
 What son of Oicles and Hypermnestra was reluctantly coerced into joining the Seven Against Thebes after his wife had accepted a bribe?  ANSWER: Amphiarius BONUS: Who was the wife of Amphiarius wife who had accepted this bribe?  ANSWER: Eriphyle
 Translate the following sentence into English: “Video multas puellas pulchras in foro Romano.” ANSWER: I see many beautiful girls in the Roman forum. BONUS: Translate the following sentence into English: “Nulla puella mihi amica est.” ANSWER: No girl is friendly to me/No girl is my girlfriend.
 In Latin, how many tenses can a verb take? ANSWER: six BONUS: How many voices are there for verbs in Latin? ANSWER: two
 In what battle of AD 9 did the Romans suffer a disastrous defeat, leading emperor Augustus to bewail “Give me back my legions!” ANSWER: Teutoberg Forest BONUS: The quote “Give me back my legions!” traditionally also includes the name of the defeated Roman general. Name him. ANSWER: (Quinctilius) Varus
 Give the correct form of the adjective bonus to agree with the noun form servo. ANSWER: bono BONUS: Give the correct form of the adjective bonus to agree with templa. ANSWER: bona
 What daughter of King Acrisius was locked in a chamber to preserve her maidenhood, only to be seduced by Zeus in the form of a golden shower?  ANSWER: Danae BONUS: Danae and her child were locked in a chest and thrown into the ocean. Who was her child?  ANSWER: Perseus
 Which word does not belong by derivation: insular, isle, insist, isolation? ANSWER: insist BONUS: From what Latin word are the other three words in the tossup derived? ANSWER: insula
 Responde aut Anglice aut Latine: Quot tibi bracchia sunt? ANSWER: Two/duo BONUS: Responde aut Anglice aut Latin: Quot vobis oculi sunt? ANSWER: Eight/octo, or number of people on team (e.g. three/tres, two/duo,
 Which of the following gods and goddesses was not born from the same mother as the rest: Hades, Hera, Apollo, Poseidon, Demeter?  ANSWER: Apollo BONUS: Who was the mother of Apollo? ANSWER: Leto
 In Rome, the lictores were a special class of civil servant whose job it was to attend and guard certain magistrates. Which magistrate, during the time of the Roman Republic, would have been attended by precisely twelve lictores? ANSWER: Consul BONUS: If a Roman was attended to by twice that number, 24 lictores, then what office can we deduce that he held? ANSWER: Dictator
 What is the meaning of the Latin motto found on the Eagle’s beak in the U.S. dollar bill, “E pluribus unum”? ANSWER: One from many BONUS: What is the meaning of “annuit coeptis,” also found on the bill? ANSWER: He has favored/nodded upon our undertakings.
 Who was the mortal mother of the Greek god of wine, Dionysus?  ANSWER: Semele BONUS: What sister of Semele, in a moment of confusion, tore the head off of her own son. ANSWER: Agave
 What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence? “Multis cum amicis meis ambulabam domum.” ANSWER: Accompaniment BONUS: What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence? “Miles Romanus necavit hostem gladio magno.” ANSWER: Means/Instrument
 According to tradition, what Roman king was advised by the nymph Egeria and created most of Rome’s religious institutions? ANSWER: Numa Pompilius BONUS: Name the Sabine king who was, briefly, Romulus’ co-ruler. ANSWER: Titus Tatius
 Differentiate in meaning between habeo and habito. ANSWER: habeo=(to) have / hold, habito= (to) live (in) / dwell / inhabit BONUS: Differentiate in meaning between mens and mensa. ANSWER: mens= mind / intellect, mensa=table
 In the structure and layout of a Roman house, what was a “cubiculum?” ANSWER: bedroom BONUS: What was the term for the small chest containing personal or valuable items that might be found in the cubiculum? ANSWER: arca
 For the verb facio, give the 2nd person singular, imperfect active indicative. ANSWER: faciebas BONUS: Change faciebas to the 3rd person plural, perfect active indicative. ANSWER: Fecerunt
 What Roman politician and writer fought against Vercingetorix during his campaigns in Gaul? ANSWER: (Gaius Julius) Caesar BONUS: Who was Caesar’s chief opponent during the civil wars? ANSWER: Pompey
 Differentiate in meaning between cado and caedo. ANSWER: Cado is “to fall”; Caedo is “to kill” BONUS: Differentiate in meaning between nix and nex ANSWER: Nix is snow; Nex is murder, slaughter
 Quaestor, Praetor and Consul were all offices in what sequence of Roman political offices? ANSWER: The cursus honorum BONUS: What position, not officially a part of the cursus honorum, required its holders to entertain the public with lavish spectacles? ANSWER: aedile
 What hero killed the Nemean Lion, defeated the Lernaean Hydra, and captured the dog Cerberus while completing his famous twelve labors? ANSWER: Heracles/Hercules BONUS: Who was the taskmaser of Heracles, who hid himself in a gigantic jar whenever the hero came back from a labor? ANSWER: Eurystheus
 Translate the following sentence into English: “Mater nostra vocabat nos in culinam.” ANSWER: Our mother was calling us/called us into the kitchen. BONUS: Translate the following sentence into English: “Mater noster fecerat cenam nobis.” ANSWER: Our mother had made dinner for us.
 Which of the following English words does NOT belong by derivation: Numismatic, numeration, number, numerous? ANSWER: Numismatic BONUS: We derive “numismatic” from the Latin noun “nummus.” What is the meaning of this Latin noun? ANSWER: Coin
 Aided by Hera, what young man led a band of heroes to Colchis in order to obtain the golden fleece? ANSWER: Jason BONUS: What ruler of Colchis refused to give Jason the fleece? ANSWER: Aeetes
 In 285 AD what emperor established a new form of government known as the tetrarchy? ANSWER: Diocletian BONUS: In this system of government, what were the two most powerful officials called? ANSWER: Augustus/Augusti
 What is the meaning of the abbreviation “e.g.”, whose full form in Latin is “exempli gratia”? ANSWER: For (the sake of) example BONUS: What is the full form in Latin of the abbreviation “i.e.”? ANSWER: Id est
 What use of the genitive case is found in the following sentence? “Canis Marci valde stupidus mihi videtur.” ANSWER: Possession BONUS: What use of the dative is found in the same sentence, “Canis Marci valde stupidus mihi videtur”? ANSWER: Reference
 What Olympian, the son of Zeus and Semele, delighted in drinking wine and hosting raucous parties? ANSWER: Dionysus/Bacchus BONUS: Anatomically speaking, what was unusual about Bacchus’ birth? ANSWER: He was born from a thigh (Zeus’ thigh)
 Say in Latin, “Tomorrow I will see my children.” ANSWER: Cras liberos (meos) videbo. BONUS: Using the word epistula, say in Latin: “Today I sent a letter to Italy.” ANSWER: Hodie epistulam misi ad Italiam.
 From what Latin verb with what meaning does the English noun “deletion” derive? ANSWER: Deleo (“destroy”) BONUS: From what Latin verb with what meaning does the English noun “infection” ultimately derive? ANSWER: Facio (“I make, do”)
 What daughter of the river Peneus did Apollo fall in love with after Cupid shot him with an arrow? ANSWER: Daphne BONUS: What did Daphne turn into after she prayed to her father to deliver her from Apollo’s advances? ANSWER: A laurel tree
 Translate the number “68” into Roman numerals. ANSWER: LXVIII BONUS: Translate “550” into Roman numerals. ANSWER: DL
 What man, the elder son of Augustus’ second wife Livia, succeeded Augustus to become the second emperor of Rome? ANSWER: Tiberius BONUS: Who was Rome’s third emperor? ANSWER: Caligula
 Give the dative singular of the phrase “trepidus rex”. ANSWER: Trepido regi BONUS: Make “trepido regi” plural. ANSWER: Trepidis regibus
 What giant had viper coils for feet, flashed fire from his eyes, and was so tall that he touched the stars? ANSWER: Typhon/Typhoeus BONUS: Who was the mother of Typhon? ANSWER: Gaia/Terra
 What do all of the following have in common? Viminal, Caelian, Capitoline, Esquiline, Palatine. ANSWER: They are all hills of Rome. BONUS: Name one of the two remaining seven hills of Rome. ANSWER: Aventine, Quirinal
 How many tenses of verbs are there in Latin?  ANSWER:Six BONUS: How many declensions of nouns are there in Latin? ANSWER: Five
 Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Marcus, do not help Julia.” ANSWER: Marce, noli iuvare Juliam. BONUS: Say in Latin, “Boys, do not help Julia.” ANSWER: Pueri, nolite
 What Titan defied Zeus by stealing fire and giving it to mankind? ANSWER: Prometheus BONUS: To punish Prometheus, Zeus chained him to a mountain and had a certain kind of animal pluck at his liver. What was this animal? ANSWER: Eagle or
 We all know that Rome fell in 476 AD, but in what year did the Eastern Roman Empire fall? ANSWER: 1453 AD BONUS: In what year did Augustus die? ANSWER: 27 AD
 What son of Iapetus and Clymene did Heracles enlist to help acquire the golden apples of the Hesperides? ANSWER: Atlas BONUS: What son of Iapetus and Clymene foolishly accepted Pandora as a gift from Zeus, bringing a host of ills upon mankind? ANSWER: Epimetheus
 Listen carefully to the following passage, which I will read twice, then ANS in LATIN the question that follows: Tres filii et pulcherrima uxor erat Marco, qui vetus agricola erat. Sed Marcus non equum habebat, quamquam equum volebat habere. Idcirco iter fecit Marcus ad forum ut equum inveniret. The question: Qualis erat uxor Marci? ANSWER: Pulcherrima BONUS: Quod animal Marco defuit? ANSWER: Equus
 Give the genitive singular of the phrase “ille homo magnus”. ANSWER: illius hominis magni BONUS: Make “illius hominis magni” dative plural. ANSWER: illis hominibus magnis
 Which emperor fought against the Alemmani, has a column which bears his name, and wrote a philosophical treatise called the “Meditations”? ANSWER: Marcus Aurelius BONUS: What was the name of his son, who as emperor failed to live up to his father’s legacy? ANSWER: Commodus (Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus)
 In the sentence “Claudius spoke on behalf of Marcus,” translate “on behalf of Marcus” into Latin using a prepositional phrase. ANSWER: Pro Marco BONUS: In the sentence “We like to sit beneath the bridge,” translate “beneath the bridge” into Latin. ANSWER: Sub ponte
 What type of Roman marriage involved a fictitious “sale” of the bride to the groom? ANSWER: Coemptio BONUS: What type of common law Roman marriage involved the bride leaving her husband for a specified amount of time each year? ANSWER: Manus
 According to Hesiod’s Theogony, Gaia, Eros, Erebus and Nyx all arose from a primordial cosmic substance. What was the name of this formless dark void, which comes directly into English as a word denoting “a state of extreme disorder and confusion?” ANSWER: Chaos BONUS: In Homeric epic, nectar is the drink of the gods and another substance is their food. What is the name of this substance, which comes directly into English as a word denoting “something which is extremely pleasant to taste or smell”? ANSWER: Ambrosia
 Quid Anglice significat “negotium”? ANSWER: Business, pain, trouble, annoyance BONUS: Quid Anglice significat “libido”? ANSWER: Pleasure, desire, lust, longing
 Complete the following grammatical analogy: rapio is to rapti sumus as fero is to _____________. ANSWER: Lati sumus BONUS: Make lati sumus pluperfect. ANSWER: lati eramus
 What insane emperor toured Greece because he thought he was a gifted artist, and eventually had his mother Agrippina assassinated? ANSWER: Nero BONUS: What insane emperor made his horse a senator? ANSWER: Caligula
 Of the nouns scutum, gaudium, hiems and lux, which is being described here? Utuntur hoc instrumento pugnantes in proelio, ne ab gladiis vulnerentur ANSWER: Scutum BONUS: Which of them is being described here?: fugat tenebras et mittitur ab sole. ANSWER: Lux
 What Ethiopian maiden bore Gorgophone and Perses to the hero Perseus after he saved her from a sea monster? ANSWER: Andromeda BONUS: What was the name of Andromeda’s uncle, to whom she ha been promised as a wife? ANSWER: Phineus
 Baecula, Trebia, Lake Trasimene, the Metaurus River, Cannae and Zama were all battles in what war? ANSWER: The Second Punic War BONUS: In which of those battles did Livius Salinator defeat Hannibal’s brother Hasdrubal? ANSWER: Metaurus River
 What literary device is found in the following line from Vergil? “Illi indignantes magno cum murmure montis circum claustra fremunt”. ANSWER: Alliteration or Onomatopoeia BONUS: What figure of speech is found in the following line? “Omnes multam Cerem laeti consumpserunt.” ANSWER: Metonymy
 Who am I? As a baby, I was suckled by the she-goat Amaltheia and my cries were concealed by a group of Curetes constantly banging their shields. I convinced my consort Metis to give my father Cronus an emetic, forcing him to disgorge my siblings. ANSWER: Zeus/Jupiter BONUS: Cronus had also overthrown his father. What was the name of this father, who was married to Gaia? ANSWER: Ouranos/Uranus
 Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Augusto et Antonio pugnantibus, omnes timebamus.” ANSWER: While/since Augustus and Antony were fighting, we were all afraid. BONUS: Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Mihi optimus semper fuisti, Caesare.” ANSWER: You have always been very good to me, Caesar.
 What Latin phrase refers to a legal writ requiring a prisoner to be brought before a judge, and literally means “you may have the body”? ANSWER: Habeas corpus BONUS: In Catholic theology, what Latin phrase literally meaning “from the chair” refers to an infallible pronouncement of the pope? ANSWER: Ex cathedra
 In Homer’s Odyssey, what cannibal race consumes all but one of Odysseus’ ships? ANSWER: The Laestrygonians BONUS: Who is the Laestrygonians’ king? ANSWER: Antiphates
 From what Latin noun with what meaning do we derive “salutatorian,” “salutary” and “salubrious”? ANSWER: Salus (“health, safety, welfare”) BONUS: From what Latin verb with what meaning do we derive “dissent”? ANSWER: Sentio (“feel”)
 According to tradition, what Roman king incorporated the Janiculum hill into the city, founded the sea port of Ostia, and built the Pons Sublicius? ANSWER: Ancus Marcius BONUS: Who was Ancus Marcius’ grandfather? ANSWER: Numa Pompilius
 For the verb paro, parare, give the genitive plural of the present active participle. ANSWER: Parantium BONUS: Make parantium dative. ANSWER: Parantibus
 Who am I? I lived in Alexandria. My family was called the Ptolemies. I was the seventh queen with my name. They say I killed myself with the bite of an asp. I gave birth to one son by Julius Caesar, and three children by Marc Antony. ANSWER: Cleopatra BONUS: Who am I? My name means “chickpea.” Fulvia stabbed my tongue after I died for saying mean things about her husband. ANSWER: (Marcus Tullius) Cicero
 Translate the following sentence into English: “Claudi, filia tua semper tibi amanda est.” ANSWER: Claudius, you must always love your daughter. BONUS: Translate this into English: “Scio nunc nos omnes morituros esse.” ANSWER: I know now that we will all die.
 What fisherman from Anthedon fell in love with Scylla? ANSWER: Glaucus BONUS: Unfortunately for the pair, what witch was in love with Glaucus? ANSWER: Circe
 For the verb volo, give the 2nd person plural present active indicative. ANSWER: Vultis BONUS: Change mavultis to the future perfect. ANSWER: Volueritis
 What do the following have in common? Apodyterium, Laconicum, Caldarium, Tepidarium. ANSWER: They were all rooms in a Roman bathhouse. BONUS: Which room was the hot room? ANSWER: Caldarium
 Listen to the following passage, which I will read twice. Then ANS in LATIN the question that follows. The passage: “Augustus optimus dux iudicatus est ab multis Romanis, sed non ab Marco. Nam Marcus putabat Augustum trucem esse.” The question: Quibus erat Augustus optimus dux? ANSWER: Multis Romanis. BONUS: Qualem putabat Marcus Augustum? ANSWER: Trucem
 What famous king had to wash his hands in the river Pactolus to cure them of his golden touch? ANSWER: Midas BONUS: Midas once judged a musical competition between Apollo and a smaller god. Who was this smaller god, whom Midas judged the superior musician? ANSWER: Pan
 Say iin Latin: “It is difficult to trust senators.” ANSWER: Credere senatoribus difficile est BONUS: Using a comparative adjective, say in Latin, “It is very difficult to trust senators.” ANSWER: Credere senatoribus difficilime est
 From what Latin verb do we derive the English noun “crusade”? ANSWER: Crux BONUS: From what Latin verb do we derive the English noun “corridor”? ANSWER: Curro
 What consular colleague of Julius Caesar was so weak and ineffectual that many Romans called the year “the consulship of Julius and Caesar”? ANSWER: (Marcus) Bibulus BONUS: In what year did Julius Caesar and this snivelling twit serve as consuls? ANSWER: 59 BC
 During the 1st Punic War, what Spartan mercenary saved Carthage from a Roman invasion? ANSWER: Xanthippus BONUS: What Roman general did Xanthippus defeat to do this? ANSWER: (Marcus Atilius) Regulus
 What use of the ablative case is found in the following sentence? “Certe fruimur fructis edendis.” ANSWER: Ablative with special (deponent) verbs OR Ablative of means BONUS: Name one deponent verb other than fruor that takes an ablative object. ANSWER: Potior, vescor, utor, fungor
 What king of Trachis drowned in a storm and was transformed into a kingfisher? ANSWER: Ceyx BONUS: Who was the wife of Ceyx who was similarly transformed by the gods because her grief was so great? ANSWER: Alcyone
 Quid Anglice significat “testis”? ANSWER: Witness BONUS: Quid Anglice significat “testamentum”? ANSWER: Will, testament, covenant
 In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, what deity impersonates an old woman in order to woo Pomona? ANSWER: Vertumnus BONUS: In the Metamorphoses, what young man swims across the Hellespont every night to see his beloved sweetheart Hero? ANSWER: Leander
 What is the meaning of the Latin idiom “bellum gerere”? ANSWER: To wage war BONUS: What is the meaning of the idiom “castra movere”? ANSWER: To break camp
 Along with his sons, what Trojan priest was killed by snakes sent from the sea after he warned his countrymen about the Trojan horse? ANSWER: Laocoon BONUS: What deceptive Greek convinced the Trojans that the horse was a votive offering to the Gods? ANSWER: Sinon
 Which of the following words does NOT derive from the same Latin root as the others? Consist, statutory, stipulate, station. ANSWER: Stipulate BONUS: Which of the following words does NOT derive from Latin at all? Rheostat, salt, sally, salient. ANSWER: Rheostat, salt, sally, salient
 What famous law passed in 67 BC gave Pompey command over the Mediterranean in order to fight piracy? ANSWER: The Lex Gabinia BONUS: What law, passed a year later, gave him command against Mithridates? ANSWER: The Lex Manilia
 Translate the relative pronoun in the following sentence: I loved the man who deceived us all. ANSWER: Qui BONUS: Translate the relative pronoun in the following sentence: The dogs which I trusted ate my sister. ANSWER: Quibus
 What use of the ablative appears in the following sentence: Run home with the greatest speed! ANSWER: Manner BONUS: Translate the sentence from the toss-up into Latin. ANSWER: Curre domum cum maxime celeritate.
 Whose blood stains the mulberry tree? ANSWER: Pyramus BONUS: Who wrote a play based on this tale of star-cross’d lovers? ANSWER: William Shakespeare
 Complete the following analogy: Paullus : Cannae :: Crassus : _________. ANSWER: Carrhae BONUS: Who was the other Roman general at the battle of Cannae? ANSWER: Varro
 How many tenses of verbs are there in Latin? ANSWER: Six BONUS: How many declensions of nouns are there in Latin? ANSWER: Five
 Translate the following sentence into Latin: “Marcus, do not help Julia.” ANSWER: Marce, noli iuvare Juliam. BONUS: Say in Latin, “Boys, do not help Julia.” ANSWER: Pueri, nolite
 What Titan defied Zeus by stealing fire and giving it to mankind? ANSWER: Prometheus BONUS: To punish Prometheus, Zeus chained him to a mountain and had a certain kind of animal pluck at his liver. What was this animal? ANSWER: Eagle or
 We all know that Rome fell in 476 AD, but in what year did the Eastern Roman Empire fall? ANSWER: 1453 AD BONUS: In what year did Augustus die? ANSWER: 27 AD
 For the verb maneo, manēre, give the third person, plural, pluperfect, active, indicative. ANSWER: manserant BONUS: For the verb eo, ire, give the second person, singular, future perfect, active, indicative. ANSWER: iveris
 Distinguish in meaning between volo, volare and volo, velle. ANSWER: volo, volare: to fly, volo, velle: to want/wish BONUS: Distinguish in meaning among moneo, munio, and maneo. ANSWER: moneo: to warn, munio: to fortify/build, maneo: to remain/stay
 Which mortal consort of Venus did Jupiter strike with a lightning bolt? ANSWER: Anchises BONUS: As whom did Cupid disguise himself to make Dido fall in love with Aeneas? ANSWER: Ascanius/Iulus
 Name in chronological order the emperors of 69 AD. ANSWER: Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian BONUS: What dynasty did Vespasian found? ANSWER: Flavian
 Words like “audeo,” “gaudeo,” and “soleo” belong to what verb family? ANSWER: semi-deponents BONUS: Words like “odi,” “coepi,” and “memini” belong to what verb family? ANSWER: defective
 Quid Anglice significat “nux”? ANSWER: nut BONUS: Quid Anglice significat “radix”? ANSWER: root
 Who was the mother of the cyclops Polyphemus? ANSWER: Thoosa BONUS: Which nymph did Polyphemus attempt to woo in Ovid’s Metamorphoses by saying that his hairiness makes him attractive? ANSWER: Galatea
 What chieftain of the Suebi led an attack against the Caesar’s forces in Gaul? ANSWER: Ariovistus BONUS: At what battle in 52 BC did the forces of Vercingetorix defeat the forces of Caesar? ANSWER: Gergovia BONUS: Where did Caesar’s forces land on the western coast of Greece, suffering a defeat at the hands of Pompey? ANSWER: Dyracchium
