 Give the Latin word and its meaning from which we derive the wora "officious"? ANSWER:Officium-duty BONUS: What work of Cicero was written for his son in 44 B.C.?  ANSWER:De officiis
 What farcical play aid Plautus write about a slave ana a boastful captain? ANSWER:Miles Gioriosus BONUS: Where was Plautus born? ANSWER:Sarsina in Umbria
 On what subject aia Cicero give his first Political speech? ANSWER:The Manilian Law BONUS: in what year was this law passea and what aid it proviae for? ANSWER:66 B.0 and it cave Pompey the richt to fight against Mithrioates
 Caesar, Varro, Lucretius, Sallust. Which of these dian't write on history? ANSWER: Lucretius BONUS: Give the Latin for the phrase that Lucretius wrote meaning "Nothing comes from nothing". ANSWER:Ex nihilo nihil fit.
 "0 tempora, 0 mores" is a phrase written by Cicero illustrating what arammatical construction? ANSWER:Accusative of Exclamation BONUS: In what work is this phrase found? ANSWER:The First
 In 36 B.C., Octavian defeats Sextus Pompeius at what battle. the largest and most decisive naval victory in ancient history? ANSWER:The Battle of Naulochus BONUS:-.-• Where did Agrippa train Augustus' naval forces? ANSWER:Portus Iulius
 Complete the following analogy The 1st Triumvirate:Luca The 2nd Triumvirate: ANSWER:Tarentum BONUS: What year did this re-affirmation take place? ANSWER:37 B.C.
 - Octavian was very fortunate to have such gooa friends. Name Octavian's three boon companions. ANSWER:Salvidienus Rufus. Maecenas. and Acrippa BONUS: In what years did Macenas and Agrippa die? ANSWER:Maecenas-8 B.C. Agripoa- 12 B.C.
 In the novel Jane Eyre.while Jane is walking arouna confused and hungry, she finally sees a light through the wile scenery. She says to herself, That is an ignis fatuus." What aces Jane mean by an icnis fatuus? ANSWER:Literally a foolish flame. or a foolish icea. BONUS: Earlier on in her life Jane is fcrcea to co to an orphanace called Lowood. She meets a airi named Helen Burns who becomes very close to Jane but Helen dies curing an epicemic. On her tombstone lies the inscription "Resurgam. What does this mean? ANSWER:I will rise again
 For whom aid Galanthis trick. Eileithyia into abandoning her charms that were preventing her birth of Iphicies and Heracies? ANSWER:Alcmene BONUS: How was Eileithyia preventing the chiiaoirth? ANSWER:She was sitting by her altar by the =or of the oearocm with her
 In Vergil's epitaph, to what ao "pascua. rura. duces° refer. ANSWER:pascua-Ecolocues. rura- Georcics. duces-Aeneid BONUS: What is the meter of Vergil's epitaph? ANSWER:eieciac couclec
 "The red rooster ran right into the miadie of the raucous. rowdy. rubbish." What rhetorical cevice is this? ANSWER:Alliteration BONUS: "I'm not cenyinc that the girls at Flint Hill are the prettiest...." This is an example of what rhetorical aevice? ANSWER:Litotes
 Distinguish between "for" and "fors. ANSWER:For-to speak Fors-chance BONUS: What adjective to we derive from the Latin word "fors"? ANSWER:fortuitous
 In 59 B.C.. Caesar is consul with Bibulus. It was called by some the consulship of "Julius and Caesar". Say in Latin,-: In the consulship of Julius and Caesar". ANSWER:Consulibus Julio et Caesare. Consulibus Julio Bibulocue BONUS: "Triumvirum rei publicae constituendae fui per continuos annos decem." In this sentence from the Res Gestae Divi Augusti, identify the grammatical use of "rei publicae constituendae." ANSWER:Dative of Purpose
 In 17 B.C., Horace wrote what hymn for Augustus' Secular Games? ANSWER:Carmen Saeculare BONUS: Give the plural of Carmen Saeculare. ANSWER:Carmina Saecularia
 MS Who ridiculed and questioned Phaethon's divine lineage, which eventually caused him to seek his father Helius? ANSWER:Epaphus BONUS: What other friend mourned the aeath of Phaethon by singing a sad sons and was transformed into a swan? ANSWER:Cycnus
 Between the years 41-40 B.C.. Octavian defeated Lucius Antonius and Fulvia in what war? ANSWER:The Perusine War BONUS: What two people did Octavian ask for help in this war? ANSWER:Salvidienus Rufus and AariPoa
 Translate the following: Omnes sciunt me pate aspera. ANSWER:Everyone knows that I am encurinc difficulties. BONUS: Translate this: Nescio cuffs scribat has quaesitiones. ANSWER:I do not know who is writing these cuestions. (The answer of course is David Lee)
 What year am I? The Temple of Mars Ultor is dedicated. Julia is exiled. and Aucustus received the Pacer Patriae. ANSWER:2 B.C. BONUS: What year am I? The conspiracy of Caepio and Murena occurs. Agrippa is sent to the East. and Marceilus dies. ANSWER:23 B.C.
 I Know that you are very sac that the first round. written oy David Lee. is over. What emperor wouid have been sac on account of his pumpkinification in Seneca's Apocoiocvntosis? ANSWER:Claudius BONUS: Who were the two children of Claudius by Valeria Messalina? ANSWER:Octavia and Brittanicus
 Who am I? I am two years Augustus' senior. My school -Ina was done in Rome under Orbilius. I was at Philippi with Brutus as his tribunus militum and two of my friends included Maecenas and Vergil. Some of my works are the Ars Pcetica. Eloistulae. Epodes. and Carmina. ANSWER:Quintus Horatius Flaccus BONUS: Give the years of Horace's birth and death. ANSWER:65 BC and 8 BC TOSSUP: What was the scene woven by Arachne when she was
 What was the name first known to the Greeks for Italy meaning vineland? ANSWER:Oenotria BONUS: What festival was associated with making wine? ANSWER:vinalia rustica
 What profession would have been known in Rome as araentarii? ANSWER:bankers BONUS: What is the Latin name for auilds in Rome? ANSWER:colleala
 What muse would Vergil have invoked to help him write the Aeneid? ANSWER:Calliope BONUS: What is a virga? ANSWER:it is rod. or a prophetic wand (associated with the "Virgil" spelling)
 What rhetorical device is shown in this Horatian sentence: manet sub love frigido? ANSWER:metonymy BONUS: What rhetorical device is shown in this sentence: quem fors dierum cumque dabit? ANSWER:tmesis
 What subjunctive is shown in this sentence: Hoc quid putemus esse? ANSWER:deliberative BONUS: How would you translate: Hcc quid putemus esse? ANSWER: what are we to think/ what are we to think this
 What husband of Augustus' sister Octavia was the ancestor of Claudius. Nero and Caligula? ANSWER:M. Antonius BONUS: Who was the alleged son of Caesar and Cleopatra? ANSWER:Caesarion
 My name is known by ornithologists as a family of birds. Picidae. because I was turned into such a bird by Circe. What kind of bird am I? ANSWER:woodpecker BONUS: Many people in mythology have been turned into birds and their names are now part of identifying species of birds. What bird was the nephew of Daedalus turned into? ANSWER:partidge
 Translate into Latin the following famous line from the Aeneid:Perhaps some day it will be a joy to recall even these things? ANSWER:Forsan et haec olim meminisse iuvabit BONUS: Laocoon told the Trojans not to trust the horse in three words, give these three words? ANSWER:Equo ne credite
 I am a daughter of Uranus and Gaea. I was married to Juppiter and mother of Moirae, Horae, Astraea. and Dike. I invented hexameter and I am pictured with scales and the cornucopia. I told Deucalion how to repopulate the Earth. Who am I? ANSWER: Themis BONUS: In what river did Pheathon fall after the Sun's chariot was destroyed by Jupoiter? ANSWER:Ericanus (do not accept Po)
 What poetic device is shown in the following sentence: in loco atque vino tollis lintea nealeaenti- arum? ANSWER:hendiadys BONUS: What word form was a Catullan signature as shown by such words as libellus, ocellus, labellus etc.? ANSWER:diminutive
 What was the porta Libitinesis in the arena? ANSWER:gate in which the dead were dragged out BONUS: What are the following a group of: russata. albata, veneta. and prasina? ANSWER:factiones
 Which of the following battles is not matched with the correct date: Pharsalus 48 BC, Thapsus 46 BC, Munda 45 BC, Dyrrhachium 47 BC or Ilerda 49 BC? ANSWER: Dyrrhachium BONUS: At what battle did Caesar defeat Afranius and Petreius? ANSWER:Ilerda
 The Aeneid ends with the death of Turnus. What caused Aeneas not to be merciful to Turnus when he pleaded for his life? ANSWER:Aeneas saw that Turnus was wearing the belt of Pallas, son of Evander who was killed by Turnus BONUS: Who was the nymph that was the sister of Turnus? ANSWER:Juturna
 What Greek, whose very name suggests a snake, is left behind by the Greeks so that he could trick the Trojans into bringing the Trojan horse into Troy? ANSWER:Sinon BONUS: Who was the builder of the Trojan horse? ANSWER:Epeus
 What was the room adjacent to the palaestra where the dirt and sweat of exercise was removed with the strigilis? ANSWER:destrictarium BONUS: Give the Latin verb at the root of •aestrictarius? ANSWER:stringoiaestringo
 Translate the following famous line of Horace: carpe diem, quam minium credula postero. ANSWER:seize the day, trusting as little as possible in the future BONUS: Give the first three words of the poem from which the previous sentence is taken. ANSWER:Tu ne quaesieris
 Pronunce the accentuation difference between (spell for the contestants) c-a-t-u-l-u-s and c-a-t-u-I-I-u-s ANSWER:[no answerline, I left it because it's a funny question] BONUS: How is a syllable long by position: ANSWER:(vowel is followed by two or double consonants -refinements of this rule do not need to be stated)
 Using "accido" say in Latin, "it happens that I am not very friendly" ANSWER:(accidit ut non sim amicissimus) BONUS: Translate that same sentence with accido in the perfect tense: ANSWER:accidit ut non essem amicissimus.
 Most of you have known the saying ab ova usque ad mala since your first yar in Latin. Who is the author of this saying. ANSWER:Horace BONUS: To whom do we owe the saying salus papuli suprema lex. ANSWER:(Cicero)
 Give the rare future passive infinitive of the verb tollo:  ANSWER: sublatum iri BONUS: What are the grammtical parts out of which this form is made: ANSWER:accusative supine with passive infinitive of eo
 In a time of recession you may find that your personal finances will also suffer. If your parents tell you "Peculium tuum dimidiatum est" what has happened? ANSWER: (your allowance has been cut in half insist upon the 'cut in half' or "halved" peculium can be handled in a variety of ways) BONUS: Give the famous phrase from Horace in which he uses the Latin word for 'a half' to describe his friend Vergil' ANSWER:(meae dimidium
 Give the subjunctive verb forms in this sentence: Let us go to the top of the hill to see the plain. ANSWER:(eamus, videamus) BONUS: Translate "to see" correctly without using a subjunctive, gerund, gerundive or infinitive ANSWER:(visum)
 Whom or'what do Pyramis and Thisbe address in this quote from Ovid: "Invide paries, quid amantibus obstas" ANSWER:(the wall that separates them) BONUS: Translate the sentence ANSWER:(Hateful wall, why do you stand in the way of lovers?)
 Translate the object of the verb: "I will use all my strength" ANSWER:(viribus) BONUS: Translate the whole sentence: Utar omnibus viribus meis TOSSUP: Who was given the epithet "centimanus' (the hundred-handed) for his broad-minded reforms in land laws, finance, quedcuts, roads, grammar and even poetry? ANSWER:Appius Claudius Caecus
 Give the principal parts of the Latin verb from which Augustus derives: ANSWER:augeo, augere, auxi, auctum BONUS: Give a derivative from of augeo from the 4th principal part: ANSWER:auction
 Responde Latine: Quot corda habes? ANSWER:unum BONUS: Express that question using a dative of possession:ANSWER:Quot tibi sunt corda?
 The phrase sine sale as used by Catullus does not mean "without salt" but what? ANSWER:without wit BONUS: Give another Latin word, this time in its usual plural form, which means wit: ANSWER:facetiae
 Complete this analogy: Amalthea : Zeus :: : Odysseus ANSWER:(Eurycleia) BONUS: Who was Aeneas' nurse? ANSWER:Caieta
 For what Latin and English does the abbreviation sc. stand? scilicet or scire licet ANSWER:you may understand BONUS: What other similar phrase means "evidently or namely"? ANSWER:videlicet
 What city am I? My modern name is Durres and I am the chief port of Albania. In ancient times, my harbor helped Pompey withstand a seige by Caesar in 48 BC? ANSWER:Dyrrachium BONUS: Whom did Pompey leave in charge of Dyrrhacium in order to pursue Caesar inland? ANSWER:Cato
 Tecta and puppis is regularly used by Vergil in what figure of speech? ANSWER:synecdoche BONUS: Give the meaning of each of these when so used: ANSWER:houses/buildings and ship
 "Candy is dandy but liquor is quicker" is a poem byt Ogden Nash. If we use "merum" for liquor, how would 'quicker' be translated? ANSWER:celerius BONUS: What is the technical metrical pattern of "how now brown cow"  ANSWER:spondaic dimeter
